Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life
at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system
and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of
sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will take
us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education
outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers
will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative
activities and questions. We must recognise that given space, time and freedom, children
generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key
reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and
initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as
receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily timetable is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days is actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a
source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The
textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities
requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book.
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences, Professor
Hari Vasudevan. We also wish to thank the Chief Advisors for this book, Professors
Yogendra Yadav and Suhas Palshikar along with Advisor for this book, Professor K. C.
Suri for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the
development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this possible.
We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted
us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to
the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of
2021–22
iv
Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under
the Chairmanship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their
valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and
continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments
and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

A Letter for You
Dear students, teachers and parents,
Political Science textbooks for Class IX and Class X together form an integrated
whole. That is why we called them Democratic Politics-I and Democratic
Politics-II. This book begins where the Political Science textbook stopped last year
in Class IX. Last year the tour of democracy introduced you mainly to some basic
ideas, institutions and rules of democracy. This year the focus shifts from the
institutions to the process. The book introduces you to how democracy works in
practice and what can be expected of it.
As a result of this shift, you would read much more directly about politics in this
book. Politics is about how thinking human beings determine and change the way they
live together. This involves ideas and ideals, cooperation and coordination. This also
involves conflict and competition, self and collective interest. Therefore much of
democratic politics is about power sharing.
This forms the subject matter of the first six chapters in this book. In these chapters,
we explore various forms of sharing and shaping of power in a democracy. Chapters
One and Two constitute the first unit that presents the idea of power sharing and
elaborates it in the context of power sharing between different levels of government.
The second unit, comprising chapters three and four, is about power sharing and
accommodation among different social groups. The next two chapters make up the
third unit. It tells us how different political organisations and movements are important
in democratic politics. The seventh and the eighth chapters take up the larger questions
with which we began our tour last year. Thus, what democracies have achieved and
what is yet to be achieved is discussed in the seventh chapter on outcomes. This leads
us, in the last chapter, to the challenges democracy faces in our times and the ways in
which we can overcome them. Thus ends the tour of democracy we began last year. As
we travel through the different chapters, the meaning of democracy expands.
This book is a continuation of the Class IX textbook in another sense as well. Last
year the textbook had introduced a different style and form. Since we have had a very
positive feedback from many of you regarding these features, we continue the experiment
this year as well. This book also interacts with the students with the help of stories,
illustrations, puzzles and cartoons. This time we have increased the visual elements and
introduced a new feature called ‘Plus Box’. Do read about all the old and new features
in the 'How to Use this Book'. Above all, this book does not seek to teach and preach
about democracy. It seeks to engage in a conversation with you. You would agree that
this is a democratic way of thinking about democracy.
We were fortunate this year as well that some of the leading political scientists of
the country agreed to join the Textbook Development Committee. We would like to
express our deep appreciation of the support we received in preparing this textbook
from Professor Krishna Kumar and Professor Hari Vasudevan and the advice received
from the National Monitoring Committee. We would like to thank Professor Satish
Deshpande for reading specific chapters and giving comments. A group of teachers
and educationists comprising Anuradha Sen, Suman Lata, Manish Jain, Radhika Menon,
2021–22
vi
Malini Ghose, Alex M. George and Pankaj Pushkar read the drafts and made valuable
suggestions. We would like to make a special mention of the untiring efforts of Alex
and Pankaj, the two 'super advisors' of this book, to ensure that what is presented in the
book was accurate, interesting and communicative. Parthiv Shah and Shroboni gave the
book its attractive look. Irfan Khan once again created new-look Unni and Munni for
you. Ahmed Raza of ARK Grafix provided with informative and appealing graphics
and maps. We are highly thankful to the Lokniti and Centre for the Study of Developing
Societies (CSDS) for providing a congenial home for the textbook development
committee, for sparing space and resources for this enterprise during the last two years.
At the end of this academic year, you will be taking the Board examinations. We
wish you all the best in your examinations. We wish and hope that the tour of democracy
undertaken in these two books will help you overcome two most common reactions:
that Political Science is boring and that politics is disgusting. We hope you will continue
to take interest in a critical and balanced understanding of democratic politics either by
opting for Political Science as a subject or by acting as a responsible citizen in future.
K. C. Suri Yogendra Yadav, Suhas Palshikar
Advisor Chief Advisors

How to use this book
This book retains several features with which you are familiar. These were introduced
in your Political Science textbook for Class IX. This book also has some new features
that you might wish to know about.
Overview comes at the beginning of every chapter. It tells you about the purpose
of the chapter and what is covered in it. Please read the overview before and after
reading the chapter.
Section and sub-section headings: Each chapter is divided into sections
and sub-sections. A section heading spreads over both columns on the page. This
indicates the beginning a major part of the chapter and often covers a topic specified
in the syllabus. The sub-section heading in a column indicates one point under the
section concerned.
Graphics, Collages, Photographs and Posters occupy more space in this
textbook than they did in your textbook for Class IX. You would continue to find a
wide range of political Cartoons. These images provide visual relief and some fun.
But you should not merely ‘see’ these images and turn the page. You are expected to
‘read’ the meaning of these images. Very often politics is carried out not through
words but through images. The captions and questions that often accompany these
images help you to read these images.
Munni and Unni are back with you. Like you, they have also grown up a little since
you met them in Class IX. They keep popping up and asking questions that you may
have wished to ask. Do stop to engage with their questions. And don’t hesitate to
ask similar questions to your teachers and parents.
Plus boxes contain supplementary information related to the theme of the chapter.
Sometimes the plus box has a story that invites you to reflect on the dilemmas
concerning our social and political life. You are supposed to read and discuss these.
But you need not memorise the information and contents of the plus box. Nor is
there a ‘correct’ answer to some of the moral questions posed there. These are just
meant to help you think hard. Each plus box carries a special + sign.
+
2021–22
viii
Exercises
Let us watch television, Let us listen to radio, Let us read newspaper, Let us
debate, Let’s find out or Let’s do it give students some activity in or outside the
classroom. These activities become more meaningful when the students present their
findings to the entire class and have the space for discussion. Where necessary, please
feel free to substitute one type of media with another.
Glossary appears at the margin of the page in which an unfamiliar word or expression
comes in the text. Such a word is highlighted in the text. Remember, you don’t need to
learn the definition by heart. You just need to understand the word.
Let us revise usually comes at the end of every section. The questions invite you
to apply the points learnt in that section to a specific situation. Teachers can come up
with more such in-text exercises and use these to check the progress that everyone
has made.
Exercises come at the end of every chapter. You would notice that we have introduced
some new kinds of exercises, particularly in multiple choice format, which require
reasoning and application of mind. Once you become familiar with the format, you
would enjoy the challenge.
Maps are essential not just for understanding geography but also for history and politics.
That is why some of the information is presented by way of maps in this book. You
are not expected to draw the maps, but understand patterns depicted here.

Textbook Development Committee
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS AT THE SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department History, University of Calcutta, Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISORS
Yogendra Yadav, Senior Fellow, Centre for the Study of Developing Societies, Delhi
Suhas Palshikar, Professor, Department of Politics and Public Administration, University of Pune,
Pune
ADVISOR
K. C. Suri, Professor, Department of Political Science, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad
Sanjyot Apte, Senior Lecturer, Department of Politics, S. P. College, Pune
Rajeev Bhargava, Senior Fellow, Centre for the Study of Developing Societies, Delhi
Peter R. deSouza, Senior Fellow, Centre for the Study of Developing Societies, Delhi
Alex M. George, Independent Researcher, Eruvatty, District Kannur, Kerala
Malini Ghose, Nirantar, Center for Gender and Education, New Delhi
Manish Jain, Researcher, University of Delhi, Delhi
Suman Lata, Senior Lecturer, Department of Education, Gargi College, University of Delhi,
Delhi
Pratap Bhanu Mehta, President and Chief Executive, Center for Policy Research, New Delhi
Nivedita Menon, Reader, Department of Political Science, Faculty of Arts, University of Delhi,
Delhi
Radhika Menon, Lecturer, Department of Education, Mata Sunderi College, University of Delhi,
Delhi
Sanjeeb Mukherjee, Senior Lecturer, Department of Political Science, Calcutta University, Kolkata
Priyavadan Patel, Professor, Department of Political Science, M. S. University, Vadodara
Malla V. S. V. Prasad, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Pankaj Pushkar, Senior Lecturer, Lokniti, Centre for the Study of Developing Societies, Delhi
Madan Lal Sawhney, PGT (Pol. Sc.), Govt. Sr. Sec. School, Sec. VII, R.K. Puram, New Delhi
Anuradha Sen, Principal, The Srijan School, Model Town III, Delhi
Meenakshi Tandon, PGT (Pol. Sc.), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, Lodhi Road, New Delhi
Coordinator
Sanjay Dubey, Reader, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Members
2021–22
Maps, photographs, posters, graphics and cartoons for this book are drawn from a variety of sources.
We gratefully acknowledge the following institutions and persons (with their institutional affiliation) in
this regard:
Wikipedia for the map on page 2 and for the photographs on pages 4, 5, 30 and 64, which are
available under GNU license.
ARK Grafix for the maps on pages 3 and 14 and for the graphics on pages 45, 50 and 82.
UNFPA for the map on page 43.
Flikr for the use of the photograph on page 36, under ‘Creative Commons’.
Min Bajracharya for the photographs on pages 58 and 59.
The Hindu for the photographs on pages 72 and 75.
Anhad/NCDHR for the posters on pages 33 and 54; and Anhad for the two posters on pages
46 and 65.
Zuban for generous help in searching several precious posters, including the ones on pages 40, 41
and 76.
Oxfam GB for the poster on page 44; Voluntary Health Association of India for the one on page
48; and APDP for the poster on page 65.
Oxford University Press and Raza/ARK for the graphics on pages 78, 92 and 98, which are taken
from the Report on the State of Democracy in South Asia.
Ajit Ninan of Times of India for the cartoons on pages 21, 49 and 53; Keshav of The Hindu for the
cartoons on pages 62 and 86; Kutty for the cartoon on page 21; Manjul of DNA for the one on page 85;
Surendra of The Hindu for the cartoons on pages 45 and 66; Cagle Cartoons for the cartoons on pages
6, 8, 32, 37, 68, 79, 83, 84, 91, 93-98, 103 and 111; R.K. Laxman of Times of India for the cartoons on
pages 73 and 90; and Irfaan Khan for the cartoon on page 110.
Irfaan Khan, Yesudasan and R.K. Laxman for the cartoons on the Cover page. Zuban, INSAF
(Delhi), SAHMAT, Street Art Workers.com, Oxfam GB, Aalochana (Pune), Chandralekha (Chennai),
Nari Nirjatan Pratirodh Manch (West Bangal), Sakhi (Kerala), Institute of Development Communication
(Chandigarh), Sahiyar (Gujarat), Sheba Chhachhi for the posters on back cover.
We thank Uttam Kumar and Ritu Sharma, both DTP operators at the NCERT, for their sincere
efforts in making this book error-free. We also thank Devyani Oniyal and Deepti Sharma of NCERT
for copy-editing the book.
Acknowledgements
REQUEST FOR FEEDBACK
How did you like this textbook? What was your experience in reading or using this? What were
the difficulties you faced? What changes would you like to see in the next version of this book?
Write to us on all these and any other matter related to this textbook. You could be a teacher, a
parent, a student or just a general reader. We value any and every feedback.
Please write to:
Coordinator (Political Science)
Department of Education in Social Sciences (DESS)
NCERT
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016.
