FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures
will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred
system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must
recognise that given space, time and freedom, children generate new
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one
of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode
of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as
rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required number
of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for
teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather
than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to
address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and
reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for
child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space
to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small
groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the
advisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the
2021–22
Chief Advisor for this book, Professor Tapas Majumdar for guiding the
work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development
of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this
possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which
have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the
Chairmanship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for
their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to
systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its
products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Research and Training

TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCES
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of
Culculta, Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
Tapas Majumdar, Professor Emeritus of Economics, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi.
TEAM MEMBERS
Gulsan Sachdeva, Associate Professor, School of International Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Nutan Punj, PGT, Kendriya Vidhyalaya, Border Security Force,
Najafgarh, New Delhi
Sukanya Bose, Senior Economist, Economic Research Foundation,
Katwaria Sarai, New Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Jaya Singh, Associate Professor, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges
the valuable contribution of all the individuals and organisation involved
in the development of Economics textbook for Class IX.
We are grateful to Jan Breman and Parthiv Shah, for giving us
permission to use photographs from their book Working in the mill no
more, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 2005. We also acknowledge the
contribution made by Arvind Sadana of Eklavya, Madhya Pradesh;
Janmejoy Khuntia, Senior Lecturer, School of Corrrespondence Course,
Delhi University.
Special thanks are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, DESSH,
NCERT for her constant support.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of
Dinesh Kumar, Incharge, Computer Station; Deependra Kumar and
Achin Jain, DTP Operators; and Dillip Kumar Agasthi, Proof Reader in
shaping this book. The efforts of the Publication Division, NCERT, in
bringing out this book are also highly appreciated.



