Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework, 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle
marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to
shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and community.
The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt
to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning
and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas.
We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction of
a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and
to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognize that, given
space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with
the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook
as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources
and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers
of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavor by giving higher priority
and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in
small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
NCERT appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development
committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of
the Advisory Group on Social Science, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Professor Neeladri Bhattacharya for guiding
the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development
2021–22
of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this
possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations, which
have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under
the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G. P.
Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation
committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality
of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Research and Training

As we live our life in the present and read about the happenings around the world in
newspapers, we do not usually pause to think about the longer history of these
events. We see change before our eyes, but do not always ask, why are things changing?
Very often we do not even notice that things were not the same in the past. History
is about tracking these changes, understanding how and why they are taking place,
how the present world in which we live has evolved.
The focus of the history books of Classes IX and X is on the emergence of the contemporary
world. In earlier classes (VI – VIII) you have read about the history of India. In the next
two years (Classes IX and X) you will see how the story of India’s pasts is related to the
larger history of the world. We cannot understand what was happening within India unless
we see this connection. This is particularly true about a world in which economies and
societies have become increasingly inter-connected. History cannot be always contained
within defined territorial boundaries.
In any case there is no reason to think of national territorial boundaries as the only valid unit
of our study. There are times when a focus on a small region - a locality, a village, an island,
a desert tract, a forest, a mountain - helps us understand the rich variety in people’s lives and
histories that make up the life of the nation. We cannot talk of the nation without the
people, nor the locality without the nation. Borrowing from the statement of a famous
French historian, Fernand Braudel, we may also say: it is not possible to talk of the nation
without the world.
The textbooks you will read in the next two years will combine these different levels of
focus. We move between a close focus on particular communities and regions to the
history of the nation; between the histories as they unfold in India and Europe to the
developments in Africa and Indonesia. Our focus will shift according
to themes.
What are these themes and how are they organised? What is the logic behind the
choices of themes?
All too often in the past, the history of the modern world was associated with the
history of the west. It was as if change and progress happened only in the west. As if
the histories of other countries were frozen in time, they were motionless and static.
People in the west were seen as enterprising, innovative, scientific, industrious, efficient
and willing to change. People in the east - or in Africa and South America - were
considered traditional, lazy, superstitious, and resistant to change.
For many years now these notions have been questioned by historians. We know
now that every society has had its history of change. So in understanding the making
of the modern world we have to look at the way different societies experienced and
History and a Changing World
2021–22
fashioned these changes. We have to see how the histories of these different countries
were inter-linked. Changes in one society shaped the other; developments in India and
other colonies impacted on Europe. The contemporary world was not shaped by the
west alone.
So the history of the contemporary world is not only about the growth of
industries and trade, technology and science, railways and roads. It is equally
about the forest dwellers and pastoralists, shifting cultivators and small peasants.
All these social groups in diverse ways have played their part in making the
contemporary world what it is. And it is this varied world which you will learn
about this year.
Section I, in both books, focuses on some of the events and processes that are
critical to the understanding of the modern world. This year you will read
about the French Revolution, the Russian Revolution and Nazism in this
section. Next year you will know about nationalism and anti-colonial movements
in India and elsewhere.
Section II will move from dramatic events to the routines of people’s lives – their
economic activities and livelihood patterns. You will see what the contemporary
world has meant for forest people and pastoralists; and how they have coped
with and defined the nature of these changes. Next year you will read more
about the processes of industrialisation and urbanisation, capitalism
and colonialism.
True, we read a lot about such issues. But what we read does not tell us about
their histories. They give us no idea of how things have evolved and why they
change. Once we learn to ask historical questions about all that is around us,
history in fact acquires a new meaning. It allows us to see everyday things from
a different angle. We realise that even seemingly ordinary things have a history
that is important for us to know.
To know how the contemporary world has evolved we will therefore move
from India to Africa, from Europe to Indonesia. We will read both about the
big events and important ideas, as well as everyday life. In the process of these
journeys you will discover how history can be exciting, how it can help us
understand the world in which we live.
Neeladri Bhattacharya
Chief Advisor – History

Monica Juneja, Professor, Maria-Goeppert-Mayer Guest Professor,
Historisches Seminar, University of Hanover, Germany
Vandana Joshi, Lecturer, Venkateswara College, University of Delhi,
New Delhi
Nandini Sundar, Professor, Department of Sociology, Delhi School of
Economics, University of Delhi, Delhi
Mukul Kesavan, Professor, Department of History, Jamia Millia Islamia,
New Delhi
Janaki Nair, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata
Rekha Krishnan, Head of Senior School, Vasant Valley School, New Delhi
Rashmi Paliwal, Eklavya, Hoshangabad, Madhya Pradesh
Ajay Dandekar, Visiting fellow, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai
Pritish Acharya, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneswar,
Odisha
Member–Coordinator
Kiran Devendra, Professor, Department of Elementary Education, NCERT,
New Delhi
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCE FOR THE
SECONDARY STAGE
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, Calcutta University, Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
Neeladri Bhattacharya, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies, School of Social
Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Members
Textbook Development Committee
2021–22
Acknowledgements
This book is the result of a collective effort of a large number of historians,
teachers, and educationalists. Each chapter has been written, discussed and
revised over many months. We would like to thank all those who have
participated in these discussions.
A large number of people have read individual chapters of the book. We
thank in particular the members of the Monitoring Committee who
commented on an earlier draft; Narayani Gupta and Kumkum Roy who
provided constant encouragement and support, and Richard Evans who read
the Chapter on Nazism. We have tried to incorporate most of the suggestions
that have been made on the manuscript.
Illustrating the book would have been impossible without the help of many
institutions and individuals. The Maasai Association, the North Dakota State
University Libraries, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, the
UNESCO PARZOR project and the Centre for Women’s Development
Studies, New Delhi provided photographs and reproductions from their
archive at very short notice. Some of the pictures have been accessed from
the collections of the Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division,
the Jewish Historical Institute, Warsaw, Poland, Rabindra Bhawan Photo
Archives, Viswabharati University, Shantiniketan. Sanjay Barnela, Mukul Mangalik,
and Vasant Saberwal allowed generous access to their large collection of
photographs of pastoralists and forest dwellers. We turned to Malvika Karlekar
for help in acquiring some of the pictures for the chapter on clothing, and to Ram
Guha for photographs on cricket. Anish Vanaik helped in our photo research.
Shalini Advani did several rounds of copy editing with care, and ensured that the
text was accessible to children. Shyama Warner has done more than proof reading.
We thank them both for meeting our impossible deadlines and being so involved
with the project.
We have made every effort to acknowledge credits at the end of the book;
but we apologise in advance for any omissions that may have inadvertently
taken place
