2 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
OVERVIEW
This book is about democracy. In this first chapter we see how democracy
has expanded during the last hundred years to more and more countries
in the world. More than half of the independent countries in the world
today are democracies. The expansion of democracy has not been smooth
and straight. It has seen several ups and downs in different countries. It
still remains an unstable and uncertain achievement.
This chapter begins with different stories on the making and unmaking
of democracy from different parts of the world. These stories are meant to
give a sense of what it means to experience democracy and its absence.
We present the pattern of the spread of democracy first with a series of
maps and then with a short history. The focus in this chapter is on
democracy within a country. But towards the end of the chapter, we take
a look at democracy or its absence in the relations among different
countries. We examine the working of some international organisations.
This allows us to ask a big question: are we moving towards democracy at
the global level?
CHAPTER I
Democracy
in the
Contemporary
World
3
1.1 TWO TALES OF DEMOCRACY
leader of the Socialist Party of Chile
and led the Popular Unity coalition
to victory in the presidential
election in 1970. After being
elected the President, Allende had
taken several policy decisions to help
the poor and the workers. These
included reform of the educational
system, free milk for children and
redistribution of land to the landless
farmers. He was opposed to foreign
companies taking away natural
resources like copper from the
country. The landlords, the rich and
the Church opposed his policies.
Some other political parties in Chile
also opposed his government.
Military Coup of 1973 oup of 1973
On the morning of 11 September
1973, the military took over the
seaport. The Defence Minister was
arrested by the military when he
arrived at his office. The military
President Salvador Allende
(wearing a helmet) and his
security guards in front of
La Moneda, Chile’s
Presidential Palace, on 11
September 1973, hours
before his death. What do
you read on everyone’s
face in this photograph?
“Workers of my country, I have faith in
Chile and its future. Other men will
overcome this dark and bitter moment
when treason seeks to prevail. Keep in
mind that, much sooner than later, the
great avenues will again be opened,
through which will pass free men to
construct a better society. Long live
Chile! Long live the people! Long live the
workers!
These are my last words, and I am
certain that my sacrifice will not be in
vain. I am certain that, at the very least,
it will be a moral lesson that will punish
felony, cowardice, and treason.”
These are some extracts from the
last speech of Salvador Allende
(pronounced Ayen-they). He was
then the President of Chile, a
country in South America. The
speech was given on the morning of
11 September 1973, the day his
government was overthrown by the
military. Allende was the founder
Why did President
Allende address
himself mainly to
‘workers’? Why
were the rich
unhappy with him?
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD
©La Nación
4 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
commanders asked the President to
resign. Allende refused to resign or
leave the country. But realising the
danger to the country and to his life,
he addressed the people on the
radio, part of which we read in the
beginning. Then the military
surrounded the President’s house
and started bombing it. President
Allende died in the military attack.
This was the sacrifice he was talking
about in his last speech. A
government elected by people was
overthrown by the military through
conspiracy and violence.
What took place in Chile on 11
September 1973 was a military
coup. General Augusto Pinochet
(pronounced Pinoshe), an Army
general, led the coup. The
government of the United States of
America was unhappy with Allende’s
rule and is known to have supported
and funded activities that led to the
coup. Pinochet became the
President of the country and ruled
it for the next 17 years. From a
government that was elected by the
people, the power shifted to the
President Michelle Bachelet
addressing her supporters
after her victory in the
presidential election in
January 2006. From this
photograph do you notice
any difference between an
election rally in Chile and in
India?
Did the army have
any legal right to
arrest the defence
minister of the
country? Should
the army have the
power to arrest any
citizen?
military officers. They could do as
they wished and no one could
question them. Thus a military
dictatorship was established in
Chile. Pinochet’s government
tortured and killed several of those
who supported Allende and those
who wanted democracy to be
restored. These included General
Alberto Bachelet of the Chilean Air
Force and many other officers who
refused to join the coup. General
Bachelet’s wife and daughter were
put in prison and tortured. More
than 3,000 people were killed by the
military. Many more were reported
‘missing’. No one knows what
happened to them.
ACTIVITY
 Locate and shade Chile on the map. Which
state in our country has a shape similar to
Chile?
 Follow the newspaper for one month and collect
news items related to any country in Latin
America. Did you find the news coverage
adequate?
©La Nación, Chile
5
Resto r ation of D tion of Democra c y
Pinochet’s military dictatorship
came to an end after he decided to
hold a referendum in 1988. He felt
confident that in this referendum,
the people would say ‘yes’ to his
continuing in power. But the people
of Chile had not forgotten their
democratic traditions. Their vote was
a decisive ‘no’ to Pinochet. This led
to Pinochet losing first his political
and then his military powers. The
hope Allende expressed in his last
address was realised: felony,
cowardice and treason were finally
punished. Political freedom was
restored. Since then Chile has held
four presidential elections in which
different political parties have
participated. Slowly, the army’s role
in the country’s government has
been eliminated. The elected
governments that came to power
ordered inquiries into Pinochet’s
rule. These inquiries showed that his
government was not only very
brutal, but also very corrupt.
Do you remember a little reference
made earlier to General Bachelet’s
daughter who was imprisoned and
tortured along with her mother?
That girl, Michelle Bachelet
(pronounced Mishel Bashelet), was
elected President of Chile in January
2006. A medical doctor and a
moderate socialist, Michelle became
the first woman to be a Defence
Minister in Latin America. In the
presidential elections she defeated
one of Chile’s richest men. In this
photograph of her victory speech,
she is saying to her supporters:
“Because I was the victim of hatred, I
have dedicated my life to reverse that
hatred and turn it into understanding,
tolerance and — why not say it — into
love.”
Democra c y in Poland
Let us turn to another event, this
time from Poland, in 1980. At that
time Poland was ruled by the Polish
United Workers’ Party. This was one
of the many communist parties that
ruled in several countries of East
Europe at that time. In these
countries no other political party
was allowed to function. The people
could not freely choose the leaders
of the communist party or the
government. Those who spoke
against the leaders or the party or
the government were put in prison.
The government in Poland was
supported and controlled by the
government of the Soviet Union
(USSR), a vast and powerful
communist state.
On 14 August 1980, the workers
of Lenin Shipyard in the city of
Gdansk went on a strike. The
shipyard was owned by the
government. In fact all the factories
and big property in Poland were
owned by the government. The
strike began with a demand to take
back a crane operator, a woman
worker, who was unjustly dismissed
Poland is famous for its
poster art. Most of the
posters of Solidarity carried
this special way of writing
‘Solidarnosc’. Can you find
similar examples of poster
art or wall writing in Indian
politics?
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD
Lech Walesa
6 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
from service. This strike was illegal,
because trade unions independent
of the ruling party were not allowed
in Poland. As the strike continued,
a former electrician of the shipyard,
Lech Walesa (pronounced Lek
Walesha), joined the strikers. He was
dismissed from service in 1976 for
demanding higher pay. Walesa soon
emerged as the leader of the striking
workers. The strike began to spread
across the whole city. Now the
workers started raising larger
demands. They wanted the right to
form independent trade unions. They
also demanded the release of political
prisoners and an end to censorship
on press.
The movement became so popular
that the government had to give in.
The workers led by Walesa signed a
21-point agreement with the
government that ended their strike.
The government agreed to recognise
the workers’ right to form
independent trade unions and their
right to strike. After the Gdansk
agreement was signed, a new trade
union called Solidarity (Solidarnosc
in Polish) was formed. It was the first
time an independent trade union
was formed in any of the communist
states. Within a year, Solidarity
swept across Poland and had about
one crore members. Revelations of
widespread corruption and
mismanagement in the government
made matters worse for the
rulers. The government, led by
General Jaruzelski, grew anxious
and imposed martial law in
December 1981. Thousands of
Solidarity members were put in
prison. Freedom to organise, protest
and express opinions was once
again taken away.
Another wave of strikes, again
organised by Solidarity, began in
1988. This time the Polish
government was weaker, the
support from Soviet Union uncertain
and the economy was in decline.
Another round of negotiations with
Walesa resulted in an agreement in
April 1989 for free elections. Solidarity
contested all the 100 seats of the
Senate and won 99 of them. In
October 1990, Poland had its first
presidential elections in which more
than one party could contest. Walesa
was elected President of Poland.
ACTIVITY
 Locate Poland on the map. Write down the
names of the countries that surround it.
 Which other East European countries were
ruled by communist parties in the 1980s?
Shade them on the map.
 Make a list of political activities that you could
not have done in Poland in 1980s but you can
do in our country.
Two Fe a tures of D es of Democra c y
We have read two different kinds of
real life stories. The story from Chile
was of a democratic government led
by Allende being replaced by a nondemocratic military government of
Pinochet, followed by restoration of
democracy. In Poland we tracked the
transition from a non-democratic
government to a democratic
government.
Let us compare the two nondemocratic governments in these
stories. There were many differences
between Pinochet’s rule in Chile and
the communist rule in Poland. Chile
was ruled by a military dictator,
while Poland was ruled by a political
party. The government of Poland
claimed that it was ruling on behalf
of the working classes. Pinochet
made no such claim and openly
favoured big capitalists. Yet both
had some common features:
Why was an
independent trade
union so important
in Poland? Why are
trade unions
necessary?
7
Anita made a list of the features of all the five governments that we have discussed so far. But somehow
the list got mixed up. Now she has a list of many features but she does not remember which feature
applies to which government. Can you help her by writing the correct feature under the name of the
government in the table below? Remember, some of these features may apply to more than one
government and would need to be written separately under each of these.
Features:
Chile Chile Chile Poland Poland
Allende Pinochet Bachelet Jaruzelski Walesa
 The people could not choose or
change their rulers.
 There was no real freedom to
express one’s opinions, form
political associations and organise
protests and political action.
The three democratic governments
identified above — Allende’s Chile,
Walesa’s Poland and Bachelet’s
Chile — are different in their approach
towards social and economic matters.
Allende preferred government control
on all big industries and the
economy. Walesa wanted the market
to be free of government interference.
Bachelet stands somewhere in the
middle on this issue. Yet these three
governments shared some basic
features. Power was exercised by
governments elected by the people
and not by the army, unelected
leaders or any external power. The
people enjoyed some basic political
freedoms.
From these two stories let us draw
a rough way to identify a democracy.
Democracy is a form of government
that allows people to choose their
rulers. In a democracy:
 only leaders elected by people
should rule the country, and
 people have the freedom to express
views, freedom to organise and
freedom to protest.
We shall come back to this question
in Chapter Two and develop a
definition of democracy. We shall also
note some features of a democracy.
Widespread Criticism of the
corruption government not
allowed
Ruler elected
by the people
The president
was once a
political prisoner Government
owned all
industries More than one
party exists
Ruler not
elected by the
Missing people people
People enjoyed
basic political
freedoms
Foreign
intervention in
domestic affairs
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD
Military
dictatorship
8 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
1.2 THE CHANGING MAP OF DEMOCRACY
Twentieth century was full of the
kind of stories we have read above:
stories of transition to democracy,
of challenges to democracy, of
military coups, of struggles of the
people to bring back democracy.
Was there a pattern to these stories
that record both the march towards
democracy and the setbacks to
democracy? Let us use the basic
features we noted earlier and
identify democracies among
different countries of the world.
This is what the three maps shown
here do. Take a look at these three
maps below and find out if there was
a pattern in the way democracies
have evolved in the twentieth century.
The first map depicts the countries
that were democratic in 1950, a few
years after the end of the Second
World War. This map also shows
countries from this set that had
already become democratic by 1900.
The second map presents a picture
of democratic regimes in 1975, after
most of the colonies had gained
independence. Finally, we take
another leap and look at democracies
in the year 2000, at the beginning of
the twenty-first century.
As we look at these maps, let us
ask ourselves some questions. How
has democracy marched through
the twentieth century? Is there a
clear pattern of expansion? When
did the expansion take place? In
which regions?
MAP 1.1: DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENTS IN 1900-1950
DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT IN 1900 AND 1950
DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT IN 1950 BUT NOT IN 1900
9
Source: Historical data for these maps is taken from Polity IV Project dataset of Universtiy of Maryland. This dataset defines democracy as existence
of choices about policies and leaders, checks on executive power and guarantee of civil liberties. Here we have used positive ‘Polity’ scores as
indicating the existence of democracy. In some cases the scores of dataset have been modified. For details see http://www.cidcm.umd.edu
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD
MAP 1.3: DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENTS IN 2000
MAP 1.2: DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENTS IN 1975
DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT IN 2000
DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT IN 1975
10 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
On the basis of these maps identify up to three countries (in some cases you won’t find three countries) that
were democratic in these continents for the given years and make a table as given below.
Year Africa Asia Europe Latin America
1950
1975
2000
 Identify some countries from map 1.1 that became democratic between 1900 and 1950.
 Identify some countries from map 1.1 and 1.2 that were democratic in 1950 and 1975.
 Identify some European countries from map 1.2 and 1.3 that were democratic in 1975 and 2000.
 Identify some countries in Latin America that became democratic after 1975.
 Make a list of big countries that were not democratic in 2000.
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
1.3 PHASES IN THE EXPANSION
OF DEMOCRACY
In Britain, the progress towards
democracy started much before the
French Revolution. But the progress
was very slow. Through the
eighteenth and the nineteenth
centuries, series of political events
reduced the power of monarchy and
feudal lords. The right to vote was
granted to more and more people.
Around the same time as the French
Revolution, the British colonies in
North America declared themselves
independent in 1776. In the next few
years these colonies came together
to form the United States of America.
They adopted a democratic
Looking at these
maps, which period
do you find most
important in the
expansion of
democracy? Why?
Let us summarise the main points
that emerge from a reading of these
maps. You need to go back to the
maps to answer the question that
comes after each point.
 Democracy has expanded
throughout the twentieth
century. Is it correct to say that
at each point in these maps, the
number of democratic countries is
larger than at the previous point
in time?
 Democracy did not spread
evenly in all parts of the world.
It was established first in some
regions and then spread to other
regions. Which continents in the
world had a large number of
democracies in 1900 and 1950?
And which continents did not have
almost any?
 While a majority of countries are
democratic today, there are still
large parts of the world that are
not democratic. Which regions in
the world account for most of the
countries that were not
democracies in 2000?
The Beginning The Beginning
These maps do not tell us much
about what happened before the
twentieth century. The story of modern democracy began at least two
centuries ago. You may have read
the chapter on the French Revolution of 1789 in the history book of
this course. This popular uprising
did not establish a secure and stable
democracy in France. Throughout
the nineteenth century, democracy
in France was overthrown and restored several times. Yet the French
Revolution inspired many struggles
for democracy all over Europe.
11
constitution in 1787. But here too
the right to vote was limited to very
few men.
In the nineteenth century struggles
for democracy often centred round
political equality, freedom and justice.
One major demand was the right for
every adult citizen to vote. Many
European countries that were
becoming more democratic did not
initially allow all people to vote. In
some countries only people owning
property had the right to vote. Often
women did not have the right to vote.
In the United States of America, the
blacks all over the country could not
exercise the right to vote until 1965.
Those struggling for democracy
wanted this right granted
universally to all adults — men or
women, rich or poor, white or black.
This is called ‘universal adult
franchise’ or ‘universal suffrage’. The
box here tells us when universal
suffrage was granted in many
countries of the world.
When was universal
adult franchise granted?
1893 New Zealand
1917 Russia
1918 Germany
1919 Netherlands
1928 Britain
1931 Sri Lanka
1934 Turkey
1944 France
1945 Japan
1950 India
1951 Argentina
1952 Greece
1955 Malaysia
1962 Australia
1965 US
1978 Spain
1994 South Africa
As you can see, by 1900 New
Zealand was the only country where
every adult had voting right. But if
you go back to the map, you can see
many other countries are marked as
‘democracies’ by the beginning of the
twentieth century. These countries
had by then governments elected by
a significant number of people,
mostly men, and had granted
political freedom in some measure.
Early democracies were established
in Europe, North America and Latin
America.
End of C nd of Colonialism
For a very long time most countries
in Asia and Africa were colonies
under the control of European
nations. People of the colonised
countries had to wage struggles to
achieve independence. They not only
wanted to get rid of their colonial
masters, but also wished to choose
their future leaders. Our country
was one of the few colonies where
people carried a nationalist struggle
to liberate the country from the
colonial rule. Many of these
countries became democracies
immediately after the end of the
Second World War in 1945. India
achieved Independence in 1947 and
embarked on its journey to transform
itself from a subject country to a
democracy. It continues to be a
democracy. Most former colonies did
not have such a good experience.
The case of Ghana, a country in
western Africa, illustrates the more
common experience of former
colonies. Ghana used to be a British
colony named Gold Coast. It became
independent in 1957. It was among
the first countries in Africa to gain
independence. It inspired other
African countries to struggle for
freedom. Kwame Nkrumah
(pronounced Enkruma), son of a
Why were women
given voting rights
much later than
men in most
countries? Why did
this not happen in
India?
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD
Note: This is only an
illustrative list from different
parts of the world. The year
indicates when the principle
of one person one vote was
fully realised in that
country. The list does not
include those cases where
the right to vote was
withdrawn later.
12 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
goldsmith and himself a teacher,
was active in the independence
struggle of his country.
After independence, Nkrumah became the first prime minister and
then the president of Ghana. He was
a friend of Jawaharlal Nehru and an
inspiration for democrats in Africa.
But unlike Nehru, he got himself
elected president for life. Soon after, in 1966, he was overthrown by
the military. Like Ghana, most countries that became democracies after
gaining independence had a mixed
record. They could not remain democracies for long.
ACTIVITY
 Locate Ghana in an atlas and then spot it in the
three maps in the previous section. Was Ghana
a democracy in 2000?
 Do you think it is good to elect someone
President for life? Or is it better to hold regular
elections after every few years?
Rece n t phase t phase
The next big push towards democracy
came after 1980, as democracy was
revived in several countries of Latin
America. The disintegration of the
Soviet Union accelerated this process.
From the story of Poland we know
that the then Soviet Union controlled
many of its neighbouring communist
countries in Eastern Europe. Poland
and several other countries became
free from the control of the Soviet
Union during 1989-90. They chose
to become democracies. Finally the
Soviet Union itself broke down in
1991. The Soviet Union comprised 15
Republics. All the constituent
Republics emerged as independent
countries. Most of them became
democracies. Thus the end of Soviet
control on East Europe and the break
up of the Soviet Union led to a big
change in the political map of the
world.
In this period major changes also
took place in India’s neighbourhood.
Pakistan and Bangladesh made a
transition from army rule to
democracy in 1990s. In Nepal, the
king gave up many of his powers to
become a constitutional monarch to
be guided by elected leaders.
However, these changes were not
permanent. In 1999 General
Musharraf brought back army rule
in Pakistan. In 2005 the new king
of Nepal dismissed the elected
government and took back political
freedoms that people had won in the
previous decade.
Yet the overall trend in this period
points to more and more countries
turning to democracy. This phase
still continues. By 2005, about 140
countries were holding multi-party
elections. This number was higher
than ever before. More than 80
previously non-democratic countries
have made significant advances
towards democracy since 1980. But,
even today, there are many
countries where people cannot
express their opinion freely. They
Kwame Nkrumah Memorial
Park in Accra, the capital of
Ghana. This park was
commissioned in 1992,
twenty years after Nkrumah
passed away. What might
have caused this delay?
Dev Ley, Wikipedia, GNU Free Documentation License
13
still cannot elect their leaders. They
cannot take big decisions about their
present and future life.
One such country is Myanmar,
previously known as Burma. It
gained freedom from colonial rule in
1948 and became a democracy. But
the democratic rule ended in 1962
with a military coup. In 1990
elections were held for the first time
after almost 30 years. The National
League for Democracy, led by Aung
San Suu Kyi (pronounced Soo-chi),
won the election. But the military
leaders of Myanmar refused to step
down and did not recognise the
election results. Instead, the military
put the elected pro-democracy
leaders, including Suu Kyi, under
house arrest. Political activists
accused of even the most trivial
offences have been jailed. Anyone
caught publicly airing views or
issuing statements critical of the
regime can be sentenced up to
twenty years in prison. Due to the
coercive policies of the military-ruled
government in Myanmar, about 6 to
10 lakh people in that country have
been uprooted from their homes and
have taken shelter elsewhere.
Despite being under house arrest,
Suu Kyi continued to campaign for
democracy. According to her: “The
quest for democracy in Burma is the
struggle of the people to live whole,
meaningful lives as free and equal
members of the world community.” Her
struggle has won international
recognition. She has also been
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. Yet
the people in Myanmar are still
struggling to establish a democratic
government in their country.
ACTIVITY
 Locate Myanmar on an atlas. Which Indian
states border this country?
 Write a short essay on the life of Aung San
Suu Kyi.
 Collect newspaper reports on the struggle for
democracy in Myanmar.
What should be the
policy of the
government of
India towards the
military rulers of
Myanmar?
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD
read
the
cartoon
This cartoon
appeared in 2005
when Aung San Suu
Kyi turned 60. What is
the cartoonist saying
here? Will the army
rulers feel happy with
this cartoon?
©Stephane Peray, Thailand, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
14 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
1. 4 D EMOCRACY AT THE GLOBAL LEVEL?
After reading about the various
phases of expansion of democracy,
a teacher, Mr. Singh, asked the
students to summarise what they
had learnt. This is how the
conversation took place:
Farida: We have learnt that democracy has been
expanding to more and more regions and
countries all over the world.
Rajesh: Yes, we live in a better world than before.
It seems we are moving towards a world
democracy.
Sushmita: World democracy! How can you say
that? I saw a television programme that showed
how the Americans invaded Iraq without any
justification. The people of Iraq were not
consulted at any stage. How can you call that
a world democracy?
Farida: I am not talking about the relationship
between different countries. I am only saying
that more and more countries are becoming
democratic.
Rajesh: But what is the difference between the
two? If more and more countries become
democratic, isn’t it obvious that the world also
becomes more democratic? After all the Iraq
war was all about taking democracy to that
country.
Sushmita: No, it is not obvious to me.
Singh sir: I think we are talking about two very
different things here. Farida spoke about
establishment of democratic governments within
different countries in the world today. Sushmita
and Rajesh have differences over something else.
Their difference is over the relationship among
different countries. It is quite possible, Rajesh,
that the rulers of a country who are
democratically elected by their people may want
to dominate over other countries.
Sushmita: Yes sir. That is exactly what happened
in the case of the war on Iraq.
Surinder: I am confused. How can we talk about
democracy at the global level? Is there any
world government? Who is the president of the
world? If there is no government, how can it
be democratic or non-democratic?
International Organisations International Organisations
Let us respond to the question that
came up in this conversation: Does
an increase in the number of
democratic countries all over the
world automatically lead to
democratic relations among
countries? Before we do that, let us
think about the point raised by
Surinder. There is a government of
India, a government of the United
States of America, and so on. But
there is no government of the world.
No government can pass any law
that will apply to all the people of
the world. If there is no such
government, if there are no rulers
and ruled, how can we apply the two
features of democracy here? These
two features, you would recall, were
that the rulers should be elected by
the people and that people should
have basic political freedoms.
Should there be a
world government?
If yes, who should
elect it? And, what
powers should it
have?
This cartoon was published
in Mexico in 2005 and was
titled ‘International Games’.
Which games is the
cartoonist talking about
here? What does the ball
symbolize? Who are the
players?
©Angel Boligan, Universal,Mexico, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
15
While Surinder is right in a simple
sense, we cannot say that the
question of democracy does not arise
here. There is no single World
Government, but there are many
institutions in the world that
perform partially the functions of
such a government. These
organisations cannot command
countries and citizens in a way a
government can, but they do make
rules that put limits on what
governments can do. Consider these
points:
 Who makes laws and rules to
govern the seas that do not fall
within the boundaries of any one
country? Or who takes steps to
control environmental degradation
that threatens all the countries
together. The United Nations (UN)
has evolved many Conventions on
these questions that are now
binding on most countries of the
world. The UN is a global
association of nations of the world
to help cooperation in
international law, security,
economic development and social
equity. The UN Secretary General
is its chief administrative officer.
 What happens when a country
attacks another country in an
unjust manner? The UN Security
Council, an organ of the UN, is
responsible for maintaining peace
and security among countries. It
can put together an international
army and take action against the
wrongdoer.
 Who lends money to governments
when they need it? The International Monetary Fund (IMF) does
so. The World Bank also gives
loans to the governments. Before
lending they ask the concerned
government to show all its
accounts and direct it to make
changes in its economic policy.
Are these decisions Are these decisions
democratic?
So, there are many institutions at
the world level that perform some
of the functions that a world
government would perform. But we
need to know just how democratic
these organisations are. The
yardstick here is whether each of
the countries has free and equal
say in the decisions that affect
them. In this light let us examine
the organisation of some of these
world bodies.
Every one of the 193 member
states (as on 1 September 2012)
of the UN has one vote in the UN
General Assembly. It meets in
regular yearly sessions under a
president elected from among the
representatives of the member
countries. General Assembly is like
the parliament where all the
discussion takes place. In that
sense the UN would appear to be a
very democratic organisation. But
the General Assembly cannot take
any decision about what action
should be taken in a conflict
between different countries.
The fifteen-member Security
Council of the UN takes such
crucial decisions. The Council has
five permanent members – US,
Russia, UK, France and China. Ten
other members are elected by the
General Assembly for two-year
terms. The real power is with five
permanent members. The
permanent members, especially the
US, contribute most of the money
needed for the maintenance of the
UN. Each permanent member has
veto power. It means that the
Council cannot take a decision if
any permanent member says no to
that decision. This system has led
more and more people and
countries to protest and demand
that the UN becomes more
democratic.
Should the
permanent
members of the
UN be given the
power to veto?
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD
16 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
is one of the biggest moneylenders
for any country in the world. Its 188
member states (as on 1 September
2012) do not have equal voting
rights. The vote of each country is
weighed by how much money it has
contributed to the IMF. More than
52% of the voting power in the IMF
is in the hands of only ten countries
(US, Japan, Germany, France, UK,
China, Italy, Saudi Arabia, Canada
and Russia). The remaining 178
countries have very little say in how
these international organisations take
decisions. The World Bank has a
similar system of voting. The President
of the World Bank has always been a
citizen of the US, conventionally
nominated by the Treasury Secretary
(Finance Minister) of the US
government.
ACTIVITY
 Find out more about the history and various
organs of the United Nations.
 Collect any news about the decisions of the
World Bank and the IMF.
Compare these to the kind of
democratic practices that we have
been discussing in this chapter.
What would you say about a country
where some persons have a
permanent position in the ministry
and have the power to stop the
decision of the entire parliament? Or
a parliament where five per cent of
the members hold a majority of
votes? Would you call these
democratic? Most of the global
institutions fail to pass the simple
test of democracy that we use for
national governments.
If global institutions are not
democratic, are they at least
becoming more democratic than
before? Here too the evidence is not
very encouraging. In fact, while
nations are becoming more
democratic than they were earlier,
international organisations are
becoming less democratic. Twenty
years ago there were two big powers
in the world: the US and the Soviet
Union. The competition and conflict
between these two big powers and
their allies kept a certain balance in
all the global organisations. After the
collapse of the Soviet Union, the US
appears to be the only superpower
in the world. This American
dominance affects the working of
international organisations.
This is not to say that there is no
urge or move towards global
democracy. The urge comes from
people who get more opportunities
to come in touch with one another.
Over the last few years the people of
different countries have come
together without their governments’
support. They have formed global
organisations against war and
against domination of the world by
a few countries and business
companies. As in the case of
democracy within the nations, the
initiative for democracy among
nations has come from the struggles
of the people.
read
the
cartoon
Wolfowitz was a
senior official in the
Department of
Defence in the US
(commonly called the
Pentagon). He was an
aggressive supporter
of the invasion of Iraq.
The cartoon
comments on his
appointment as the
President of the World
Bank. What does the
cartoon tell us about
the relationship
between the World
Bank and the US? ©Patrick Chappatte, International Herald Tribune,
Cagle Cartoons Inc.
17
Here are some suggestions to strengthen world democracy. Do you support these changes? Are these
changes likely to happen? Give your reasons for each of these.
 More nations should become permanent members of the Security Council.
 UN General Assembly should become like a world parliament with representatives from each country
in proportion to the population of the country. These representatives should elect a world government.
 Individual countries should not have armies. The UN should maintain task forces to bring about
peace in case of conflict between nations.
 A UN President should be elected directly by all the people of the world.
rule in 1932. Three decades later
there were a series of coups by
military officers. Since 1968, it was
ruled by Arab Socialist Ba’th Party
(the Arabic word Ba’th means
renaissance). Saddam Hussein, a
leading Ba’th party leader, played a
key role in the 1968 coup that
brought the party to power. This
government abolished traditional
Islamic law and gave women the
right to vote and several freedoms
not granted in other west Asian
countries. After becoming the
president of Iraq in 1979, Saddam
ran a dictatorial government and
suppressed any dissent or
opposition to his rule. He was known
to have got a number of political
opponents killed and persons of
ethnic minorities massacred.
The US and its allies like Britain,
alleged that Iraq possessed secret
nuclear weapons and other
‘weapons of mass destruction’
which posed a big threat to the
world. But when a UN team went
to Iraq to search for such weapons,
it did not find any. Still the US and
its allies invaded Iraq, occupied it
and removed Saddam Hussein from
power in 2003. The US installed an
interim government of its
preference. The war against Iraq
was not authorised by the UN
Security Council. Kofi Annan, the
UN Secretary General, said that the
US war on Iraq was illegal.
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD
Democracy promotion Democracy promotion
Take a close look at the two
cartoons on this and on the next
page. These cartoons raise a
fundamental question related to
global democracy. Recently, many
powerful countries in the world,
particularly the United States of
America, have taken on the task of
democracy promotion in the rest of
the world. They say that propagating
the values of democracy is not
enough. Existing democracies
should directly intervene in
countries that are non-democratic
to establish democracy there. In
some cases powerful countries have
launched armed attack on nondemocratic countries. This is what
Sushmita was talking about.
Let us see what happened in Iraq.
Iraq is a country in Western Asia. It
became independent from British
CHECK
YOUR
PROGRESS
read
the
cartoon
The cartoon “Cactus
of Democracy” was
published in 2004.
What does the cactus
look like here? Who is
gifting it, and to
whom? What is the
message?
©Stephane Peray, Thailand,
Cagle Cartoons Inc.
18
DEMOCRATI
C P
OLITICS
ACTIVITY
Collect information on the debate related to Iraq
within the US and the UK. What were the reasons
originally offered for the Iraq invasion by the
President of US and the Prime Minister of UK?
What were the reasons offered after the war?
The example of Iraq raises some
basic questions that we need to
think about:  Is this the right way to promote
democracy? Should a democratic
country wage a war and invade
other countries for establishing
democracy there?
 Does external help work in every
case? Or does it work only when
the people of a nation are actively
engaged in a struggle to make their
societies democratic?
 Even if external intervention leads
to the establishment of democracy
in a country, would it last long?
Would it enjoy the support of its
citizens?
 Finally, is the use of external force
to gift democracy to the people in
keeping with the spirit of
democracy?
Think about these questions in the
light of all that you have learnt in
this chapter.
r
e
a
d
the
c
a
r
toon
‘Helping Democracy’
was a comment on
the presence of US
forces during the
elections in Iraq. Do
you think the cartoon
can apply to many
other situations?
Identify some
examples from this
chapter which this
cartoon can help
understand.
©Ares, Caglecartoons.com, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
19
exercises
GLOSSARY
Censorship: A condition under which the freedom of expression is taken
away. Citizens have to take prior permission from the censor authorities of
the government for making a speech or publishing news and views.
Anything that the government finds objectionable cannot be published.
Coalition: An alliance of people, associations, parties or nations. This alliance
may be temporary or a matter of convenience.
Colony: Territory under the immediate political control of another state.
Communist state: A state governed by a communist party without allowing
other parties to compete for power. The state controls all the big property and
industry.
Coup: A coup d’état (pronounced ku de’ta), or simply a coup, is the sudden
overthrow of a government illegally. It may or may not be violent in nature.
The term is French for ‘a sudden blow or strike to a state’.
Martial law: A system of rules that takes effect when a military authority
takes control of the normal administration of justice.
Political prisoners: Persons held in prison or otherwise detained, perhaps
under house arrest, because a government considers their ideas, image or
activities as a threat to the authority of the state. Often exaggerated or false
cases are foisted on them and they are kept in detention without following
normal law.
Referendum: A direct vote in which an entire electorate is asked to either
accept or reject a particular proposal. This may be adoption of a new
constitution, a law or a specific governmental policy.
State: Political association occupying a definite territory, having an organised
government and possessing power to make domestic and foreign policies.
Governments may change, but the state continues. In common speech, the
terms country, nation and state are used as synonyms.
Strike: Mass refusal by workers or employees to perform work due to certain
grievances or because of demands not met. In most democratic countries the
right to strike is legal.
Trade Union: An association of workers for the purpose of maintaining or
improving the conditions of their employment.
Veto: The right of a person, party or nation to stop a certain decision or law.
The word comes from Latin, which means ‘I forbid’. A veto gives unlimited
power to stop a decision, but not to adopt one.
1 Which of the following does not lead to the spread of democracy?
a Struggle by the people
b Invasion by foreign countries
c End of colonialism
d People’s desire for freedom
2 Which of the following statements is true about today’s world?
a Monarchy as a form of government has vanished .
b The relationship between different countries has become more
democratic than ever before.
c In more and more countries rulers are being elected by the people.
d There are no more military dictators in the world.
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD
20 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS
3 Use one of the following statements to complete the sentence:
Democracy in the international organisations requires that …
a The rich countries should have a greater say.
b Countries should have a say according to their military power.
c Countries should be treated with respect in proportion to their
population.
d All countries in the world should be treated equally.
4 Based on the information given in this chapter, match the following
countries and the path democracy has taken in that country.
COUNTRY PATH TO DEMOCRACY
a Chile i Freedom from British colonial rule
b Nepal ii End of military dictatorship
c Poland iii End of one party rule
d Ghana iv King agreed to give up his powers
5 What are the difficulties people face in a non-democratic country?
Give answers drawing from the examples given in this chapter.
6 Which freedoms are usually taken away when a democracy is
overthrown by the military?
7 Which of the following positions can contribute to democracy at the
global level? Give reasons for your answer in each case.
a My country gives more money to international institutions.
Therefore, I want to be treated with more respect and exercise
more power.
b My country may be small or poor. But my voice must be heard
with equal respect, because these decisions will affect my country.
c Wealthy nations will have a greater say in international affairs.
They cannot let their interests suffer just because they are
outnumbered by poor nations.
d Big countries like India must have a greater say in international
organisations.
8 Here are three opinions heard in a television debate on the struggle
for democracy in Nepal. Which of these do you agree with and why?
Guest 1: India is a democracy. Therefore, the Indian government
must support the people of Nepal who are struggling
against monarchy and for democracy.
Guest 2: That is a dangerous argument. We would be in the same
position as the US was in Iraq. Remember, no outside force
can promote democracy.
Guest 3:But why should we bother about the internal affairs of another
country? We should be worried about our business interests
there, not about democracy.
exercises
DEMOCRACY IN THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD 21
exercises
9 In an imaginary country called Happyland, the people overthrew the
foreign ruler and brought back the old royal family. They said: “After
all their ancestors were our kings before foreigners started ruling us. It is good
that we have one strong ruler, who can help us become rich and powerful”.
When someone talked about democracy the wise men said it is a
foreign idea. Their struggle was to throw the foreigners and their
ideas out of the country. When someone demanded freedom for the
media, the elders thought that too much criticism of the ruler would
not help them improve their living standards. “After all, the king is so
kind and interested in the welfare of all the subjects. Why create problems for
him. Don’t we all want to be happy? ”
After reading the above passage, Chaman, Champa and Chandru
made the following observations:
Chaman: Happyland is a democratic country because people were
able to throw out the foreign rulers and bring back the
king.
Champa: Happyland is not a democratic country because people
cannot criticise the ruler. The king may be nice and may
provide economic prosperity, but a king cannot give a
democratic rule.
Chandru: What people need is happiness. So they are willing to allow
their new ruler to take decisions for them. If people are
happy it must be a democracy.
What is your opinion about each of these statements? What do you
think about the form of government in this country?
Form different groups in your class and collect different types of information
(news clippings, articles, photographs, cartoons, etc.) about struggles for
democracy in any country that is currently not democratic. Focus on the
following questions:
 What makes the government non-democratic?
 What are the main complaints and demands of the people in that
country?
 How do the existing rulers react to people’s demands?
 Who are the main leaders of the struggle for democracy?
You could present the information thus collected in various forms: an
exhibition, a collage, a report or a wallpaper.
