NOTES FOR NOTES FOR TEACHERS THE TEACHER
CHAPTER I : DEVELOPMENT
Development has many aspects. The
purpose of this chapter is to enable
students to understand this idea. They
have to understand that people have
different perspectives on development and
there are ways by which we can arrive at
common indicators for development. To
do this, we have used situations that they
can respond to in an intuitive manner; we
have also presented analysis that is more
complex and macro in nature.
How can countries or states be
compared using some selected
development indicators is another
question that students would read about
in this chapter. Economic development
can be measured and income is the most
common method for measuring
development. However, the income
method, though useful, has several
weaknesses. Hence, we need newer ways
of looking at development using indicators
of quality of life and environmental
sustainability.
It is necessary for you to expect the
students to respond actively in the
classroom and on a topic such as the
above, there would be wide variation in
opinion and possibility of debate. Allow
students to argue their point of view. At
the end of each section there are a few
questions and activities. These serve two
purposes: first, they recap the ideas
discussed in the section and second, they
enable better understanding of the themes
discussed by bringing the learners closer
to their real-life situations.
There are certain terms used in this
chapter that would require clarification —
Per Capita Income, Literacy Rate, Infant
Mortality Rate, Attendance Ratio, Life
Expectancy, Gross Enrolment Ratio, and
Human Development Index. Though data
pertaining to these terms are provided,
these would need further explanation. You
may also need to clarify the concept of
purchasing power parity that is used to
calculate per capita income in Table 1.6.
It is necessary to keep in mind that these
terms are used as an aid to the discussion
and not something to be memorised.
Sources for Information
The data for this chapter is taken from
reports published by the Government of
India (Economic Survey), United Nations
Development Programme (Human
Development Report) and World Bank
(World Development Indicators). These
reports are being published every year. It
may be interesting to look up these reports
if they are available in your school library.
If not, you may log on to the websites of
these institutions (www.budgetindia.nic.in,
www.undp.org, www.worldbank.org).
Data is also available from the Reserve
Bank’s Handbook of Statistics on Indian
Economy, available at www.rbi.org).
2 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
2015-2016
DEVELOPMENT 3
The idea of development or progress
has always been with us. We have
aspirations or desires about what we
would like to do and how we would
like to live. Similarly, we have ideas
about what a country should be like.
What are the essential things that we
require? Can life be better for all? How
should people live together? Can there
be more equality? Development
involves thinking about these
questions and about the ways in
which we can work towards achieving
these goals. This is a complex
task and in this chapter we shall
make a beginning at understanding
development. You will learn more
about these issues in greater depth
in higher classes. Also, you will find
answers to many of these questions
not just in economics but also in your
course in history and political science.
This is because the way we live today
is influenced by the past. We can’t
desire for change without being aware
of this. In the same way, it is only
through a democratic political
process that these hopes and
possibilities can be achieved in
real life.
DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER I
“Without me they cannot develop...
in this system I cannot develop!”
2015-2016
4 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Let us try to imagine what
development or progress is likely to
mean to different persons listed in
Table 1.1. What are their aspirations?
You will find that some columns are
partially filled. Try to complete the
table. You can also add any other
category of persons.
Category of Person
Landless rural labourers
Prosperous farmers from Punjab
Farmers who depend only on
rain for growing crops
A rural woman from a land
owning family
Urban unemployed youth
A boy from a rich urban family
A girl from a rich urban family
An adivasi from Narmada valley
WHAT DEVELOPMENT PROMISES —
DIFFERENT PEOPLE, DIFFERENT GOALS
Having filled Table 1.1, let us now
examine it. Do all of these persons
have the same notion of development
or progress? Most likely not. Each
one of them seeks different things.
They seek things that are most
important for them, i.e., that which
can fulfil their aspirations or desires.
In fact, at times, two persons or
groups of persons may seek things
TABLE 1.1 DEVELOPMENTAL GOALS OF DIFFERENT
CATEGORIES OF PERSONS
Developmental Goals / Aspirations
More days of work and better wages; local school is able to
provide quality education for their children; there is no social
discrimination and they too can become leaders in the village.
Assured a high family income through higher support prices for
their crops and through hardworking and cheap labourers; they
should be able to settle their children abroad.
She gets as much freedom as her brother and is able to
decide what she wants to do in life. She is able to pursue her
studies abroad.
YOU WANT A CAR? THE WAY OUR COUNTRY IS
SET UP ALL YOU CAN HOPE FOR IS MAY BE TO
ONE DAY OWN THE RICKSHAW YOU PULL!
2015-2016
which are conflicting. A girl expects
as much freedom and opportunity as
her brother, and that he also shares
in the household work. Her brother
may not like this. Similarly, to get
more electricity, industrialists may
want more dams. But this may
submerge the land and disrupt the
lives of people who are displaced – such
as tribals. They might resent this and
may prefer small check dams or tanks
to irrigate their land.
So, two things are quite clear: one,
different persons can have
different developmental goals and
two, what may be development for
one may not be development for
the other. It may even be
destructive for the other.
A demonstration
meeting against
raising the height
of Sardar
Sarovar Dam on
Narmada River
INCOME AND OTHER GOALS
If you go over Table 1.1 again, you
will notice one common thing: what
people desire are regular work, better
wages, and decent price for their crops
or other products that they produce.
In other words, they want more
income.
Besides seeking more income, oneway or the other, people also seek
things like equal treatment, freedom,
security, and respect of others. They
resent discrimination. All these are
important goals. In fact, in some cases,
these may be more important than
more income or more consumption
because material goods are not all
that you need to live.
Money, or material things that one
can buy with it, is one factor on which
our life depends. But the quality of our
life also depends on non-material
things mentioned above. If it is not
obvious to you, then just think of the
role of your friends in your life. You
may desire their friendship. Similarly,
there are many things that are not
easily measured but they mean a lot
to our lives. These are often ignored.
THOSE PEOPLE
DON’T WANT TO
DEVELOP!
2015-2016
6 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
1. Why do different persons have different notions of development? Which of the following
explanations is more important and why?
(a) Because people are different.
(b) Because life situations of persons are different.
2. Do the following two statements mean the same? Justify your answer.
(a) People have different developmental goals.
(b) People have conflicting developmental goals.
3. Give some examples where factors other than income are important aspects of our lives.
4. Explain some of the important ideas of the above section in your own words.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
However, it will be wrong to conclude
that what cannot be measured is not
important.
Consider another example. If you
get a job in a far off place, before
accepting it you would try to consider
many factors, apart from income,
such as facilities for your family,
working atmosphere, or opportunity
to learn. In another case, a job may
give you less pay but may offer regular
employment that enhances your
sense of security. Another job,
however, may offer high pay but no
job security and also leave no time for
your family. This will reduce your
sense of security and freedom.
Similarly, for development,
people look at a mix of goals. It is
true that if women are engaged in paid
work, their dignity in the household
and society increases. However, it is
also the case that if there is respect
for women there would be more
sharing of housework and a
greater acceptance of women
working outside. A safe and secure
environment may allow more women
to take up a variety of jobs or run
a business.
Hence, the developmental goals
that people have are not only about
better income but also about other
important things in life.
If, as we have seen above, individuals
seek different goals, then their notion
of national development is also likely
to be different. Discuss among
yourselves on what India should do
for development.
Most likely, you would find that
different students in the class have given
different answers to the above question.
In fact, you might yourself think of
many different answers and not be too
sure of any of these. It is very
important to keep in mind that
different persons could have
different as well as conflicting
notions of a country’s development.
However, can all the ideas be
considered equally important? Or, if
there are conflicts how does one
decide? What would be a fair and just
path for all? We also have to think
whether there is a better way of doing
things. Would the idea benefit a large
number of people or only a small
group? National development means
thinking about these questions.
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
2015-2016
DEVELOPMENT 7
Discuss the following situations:
1. Look at the picture on the right. What should
be the developmental goals for such an area?
2. Read this newspaper report and answer the
questions that follow:
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
If even the idea of what constitutes
development can be varied and
conflicting, then certainly there can be
differences about ways of developing. If
you know of any such
controversy, try to find out
arguments advanced by different
people. You may do so by talking to
different persons or you may find it from
newspapers and television.
(i) Who are the people who benefited
and who did not?
(ii) What should be the developmental
goal for this country?
3. What can be some of the developmental goals for your village, town or locality?
ACTIVITY 1
A vessel dumped 500 tonnes of liquid toxic wastes into open-air dumps in a city and in the surrounding sea. This happened in a city called Abidjan in Ivory Coast, a country in Africa. The fumes from the highly toxic waste caused nausea, skin rashes, fainting, diarrhoea etc. After a month seven persons were dead, twenty in hospital and twenty six thousand treated for symptoms of poisoning. A multinational company dealing in petroleum and metals had contracted a local company of the Ivory Coast to dispose the toxic waste from
its ship.
2015-2016
8 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
You might ask — if development can
mean different things, how come some
countries are generally called
developed and others under -
developed? Before we come to this,
let us consider another question.
When we compare different things,
they could have similarities as well as
differences. Which aspects do we use
to compare them? Let us look at
students in the class itself. How do
we compare different students? They
differ in their height, health, talents
and interests. The healthiest student
may not be the most studious one.
The most intelligent student may not
be the friendliest one. So, how do we
compare students? The criterion we
may use depends on the purpose of
comparison. We use different criterion
to choose a sports team, a debate
team, a music team or a team to
organise a picnic. Still, if for some
purpose, we have to choose the
criterion for the all-round progress of
children in the class, how shall we
do it?
Usually we take one or more
important characteristics of
persons and compare them based
on these characteristics. Of
course, there can be differences about
what are important characteristics
that should form the basis of
comparison: friendliness and spirit of
cooperation, creativity or marks
secured?
This is true of development too.
For comparing countries, their
income is considered to be one of
the most important attributes.
Countries with higher income are
more developed than others with less
income. This is based on the
understanding that more income
means more of all things that human
beings need. Whatever people like,
and should have, they will be able to
get with greater income. So, greater
income itself is considered to be one
important goal.
Now, what is the income of a
country? Intuitively, the income of the
country is the income of all the
residents of the country. This gives
us the total income of the country.
However, for comparison between
countries, total income is not such an
useful measure. Since, countries have
different populations, comparing total
income will not tell us what an average
person is likely to earn. Are people in
one country better off than others in a
different country? Hence, we compare
the average income which is the total
income of the country divided by its
total population. The average income
is also called per capita income.
In World Development Reports,
brought out by the World Bank, this
criterion is used in classifying
countries. Countries with per capita
income of US$ 12616 per annum and
above in 2012, are called rich countries
and those with per capita income of
US$ 1035 or less are called low-income
countries. India comes in the category
of low middle income countries
because its per capita income in 2012
was just US$ 1530 per annum. The
rich countries, excluding countries of
Middle East and certain other small
countries, are generally called
developed countries.
HOW TO COMPARE DIFFERENT COUNTRIES
OR STATES?
2015-2016
DEVELOPMENT 9
Country
Monthly incomes of citizens in 2012
(in Rupees)
I II III IV V Average
Country A 9500 10500 9800 10000 10200
Country B 500 500 500 500 48000
assured of being its fifth citizen
but if it is a lottery that decides
our citizenship number then
perhaps most of us will prefer to
live in country A. Even though
both the countries have identical
average income, country A is
preferred because it has more
equitable distribution. In this
country people are neither very
rich nor extremely poor. On the
other hand most citizens in
country B are poor and one
person is extremely rich. Hence,
while average income is useful
for comparison it does not tell us
how this income is distributed
among people.
1. Give three examples where an average is used for comparing situations.
2. Why do you think average income is an important criterion for development? Explain.
3. Besides size of per capita income, what other property of income is important in
comparing two or more societies?
4. Suppose records show that the average income in a country has been increasing
over a period of time. From this, can we conclude that all sections of the economy
have become better? Illustrate your answer with an example.
5. From the text, find out the per capita income level of low-income countries as per
World Development Reports.
6. Write a paragraph on your notion of what should India do, or achieve, to become a
developed country.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
Average Income
While ‘averages’ are useful for comparison, they also hide disparities.
Will you be equally happy to live in both these
countries? Are both equally developed? Perhaps
some of us may like to live in country B if we are
For example, let us consider two countries, A and
B. For the sake of simplicity, we have assumed
that they have only five citizens each. Based on
data given in Table 1.2, calculate the
average income for both the countries.
TABLE 1.2 COMPARISON OF TWO
COUNTRIES
COUNTRY WITH NO RICH AND NO POOR COUNTRY WITH RICH AND POOR
WE
MADE THE
CHAIRS
AND WE
USE
THEM.
DEVELOPMENT 9
WE
MADE THE
CHAIRS
AND HE
TOOK
THEM.
2015-2016
10 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
When we looked at individual
aspirations and goals, we
found that people not only
think of better income but
also have goals such as
security, respect for others,
equal treatment, freedom, etc.
in mind. Similarly, when we
think of a nation or a region,
we may, besides average
income, think of other equally
important attributes.
INCOME AND OTHER CRITERIA
What could these attributes be?
Let us examine this through an
example. Table 1.3 gives the per capita
income of Maharashtra, Kerala and
Bihar. Actually, these figures are of
Per Capita Net State Domestic Product
at Current Prices for 2012–13. Let us
ignore what this complicated term
exactly means. Roughly we can take
it to be per capita income of the state.
We find that of the three, Maharashtra
has the highest per capita income and
TABLE 1.4 SOME COMPARATIVE DATA ON
MAHARASHTRA, KERALA AND BIHAR
TABLE 1.3 PER CAPITA INCOME
OF SELECT STATES
State Per Capita Income
for 2012–13 (in Rs)
Maharashtra 1,07,670
Kerala 88,527
Bihar 28,774
Bihar is at the bottom. This means
that, on an average, a person in
Maharashtra earned Rs 1,07,670 in
one year whereas, on an average, a
person in Bihar would earn only
around Rs 28,774. So, if per capita
income were to be used as the
measure of development, Maharashtra
will be considered the most developed
and Bihar the least developed state of
the three. Now, let us look at certain
other data pertaining to these states
given in Table 1.4.
Source : Economic Survey 2013–14
State Infant Mortality Literacy Rate % Net Attendance Ratio (per
Rate per 1,000
2011
100 persons) secondary stage
live births (2012) (age 14 and 15 years) 2009-10
Maharashtra 25 82 64
Kerala 12 94 78
Bihar 43 62 35
(P) Provisional
Source : Economic Survey, 2013-14, National Sample Survey Organisation (Report No. 551)
Explanation of some of the terms used in this table:
Infant Mortality Rate (or IMR) indicates the number of children that die before the age of one year
as a proportion of 100 live children born in that particular year.
Literacy Rate measures the proportion of literate population in the 7 and above age group.
Net Attendance Ratio is the total number of children of age group 14 and 15 years attending school
as a percentage of total number of children in the same age group.
2015-2016
DEVELOPMENT 11
PUBLIC FACILITIES
What does this table show? The
first column of the table shows that in
Kerala, out of 1000 children born, 12
died before completing one year of age
but in Maharashtra the proportion of
children dying within one year of birth
is 25, which is more than double. On
the other hand, the per capita income
of Maharashtra is more than that of
Kerala as shown in Table 1.3. Just
think of how dear you are to your
parents, think of how every one is so
happy when a child it born. Now, try
to think of parents whose children die
before they even celebrate their first
birthday. How painful it must be to
these parents? Next, note the year to
which this data pertains. It is 2012.
So we are not talking of old times; it is
more than 65 years after independence
when our metro towns are full of high
rise buildings and shopping malls!
How is it that the average person in
Maharashtra has more income than
the average person in Kerala but lags
behind in these crucial areas? The
reason is — money in your pocket
cannot buy all the goods and
services that you may need to live
well. So, income by itself is not a
completely adequate indicator of
material goods and services that
citizens are able to use. For example,
normally, your money cannot buy
you a pollution-free environment or
ensure that you get unadulterated
medicines, unless you can afford to
shift to a community that already has
all these things. Money may also not
be able to protect you from infectious
diseases, unless the whole of your
community takes preventive steps.
The problem does not end with
Infant Mortality Rate. The last column
of table 1.4 shows around two-thirds
of children aged 14-15 in Bihar are
not attending school beyond Class 8.
This means that if you went to school
in Bihar more than two-thirds of your
class would be missing. Those who
could have been in school are not
there! If this had happened to you,
you would not be able to read what
you are reading now.
Actually for many of the important
things in life the best way, also the
cheapest way, is to provide these goods
and services collectively. Just think –
will it be cheaper to have collective
security for the whole locality or for
each house to have its own security
man? What if no one, other than you,
in your village or locality is interested
in studying? Would you be able to
study? Not unless your parents could
afford to send you to some private
school elsewhere. So you are actually
able to study because many other
children also want to study and
because many people believe that the
government should open schools and
provide other facilities so that all
children have a chance to study. Even
now, in many areas, children,
particularly girls, are not able to
achieve secondary level schooling
because government/society has not
provided adequate facilities.
Most babies do not get basic health care
2015-2016
12 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
ACTIVITY 2
(a) The literacy rate for all age groups, including young and old, is _____ for rural
males and _____ for rural females. However, it is not just that these many
adults could not attend school but that there are _____ who are currently not in
school.
 (b) It is clear from the table that _____ % of rural girls and _____% of rural boys are
not attending school. Therefore, illiteracy among children in the age group 10-
14 is as high as _____% for rural females and _____% for rural males.
 (c) This high level of illiteracy among __________ age group, even after more than
60 years of our independence, is most disturbing. In many other states also
we are nowhere near realisation of the constitutional goal of free and compulsory
education for all children up to the age of 14, which was expected to be achieved
by 1960.
Study Table 1.5 carefully and fill in the blanks in the following paragraphs. For this,
you may need to make calculations based on the table.
1. Look at data in Table 1.3 and 1.4. Is Maharashtra ahead of
Bihar in literacy rate etc. as it is in terms of per capita income?
2. Think of other examples where collective provision of goods
and services is cheaper than individual provision.
3. Does availability of good health and educational facilities depend
only on amount of money spent by the government on these
facilities? What other factors could be relevant?
4. In Tamil Nadu, 75 per cent of the people living in rural areas use
a ration shop, whereas in Jharkhand only 8 per cent of rural
people do so. Where would people be better off and why?
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
TABLE 1.5 EDUCATIONALACHIEVEMENT OF RURAL
POPULATION OF UTTAR PRADESH
Category Male Female
Literacy rate for rural population 52% 19%
Literacy rate for children in age group 10-14 years 68% 39%
Percentage of rural children aged 10-14 attending school 64% 31%
Kerala has a low Infant Mortality
Rate because it has adequate provision
of basic health and educational
facilities. Similarly, in some states, the
Public Distribution System (PDS)
functions well. Health and nutritional
status of people of such states is
certainly likely to be better.
2015-2016
DEVELOPMENT 13
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
REPORT
Once it is realised that even though
the level of income is important, yet
it is an inadequate measure of the
level of development, we begin to
think of other criterion. There could
be a long list of such criterion but
then it would not be so useful. What
we need is a small number of the
most important things. Health and
education indicators, such as the
ones we used in comparison of
Kerala and Maharashtra, are among
them. Over the past decade or so,
health and education indicators
have come to be widely used along
with income as a measure of
development. For instance, Human
Development Report published by
UNDP compares countries based on
the educational levels of the people,
their health status and per capita
income. It would be interesting to look
at certain relevant data regarding
India and its neighbours from Human
Development Report 2014.
TABLE 1.6 SOME DATA REGARDING INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
FOR 2013
Country Gross National Life Literacy Rate HDI Rank in
Income (GNI) Expectancy for 15+ yrs the world
per capita at birth population
 (2011 PPP $) 2005-2012
Sri Lanka 9250 74.3 91.2 73
India 5150 66.4 62.8 135
Myanmar 3998 65.2 92.7 150
Pakistan 4652 66.6 54.9 146
Nepal 2194 68.4 57.4 145
Bangladesh 2713 70.7 57.7 142
Source : Human Development Report, 2014
NOTES
1. HDI stands for Human Development Index. HDI ranks in above table are out of 177 countries in
all.
2. Life Expectancy at birth denotes, as the name suggests, average expected length of life of a person
at the time of birth.
3. Per Capita Income is calculated in dollars for all countries so that it can be compared. It is also done in
a way so that every dollar would buy the same amount of goods and services in any country.
ACTIVITY 3
One way to find out if adults are undernourished is to
calculate what nutrition scientists call Body Mass
Index (BMI). This is easy to calculate. Take the weight
of the person in kg. Then take the height in metres.
Divide the weight by the square of the height. If this
figure is less than 18.5 then the person would be
considered undernourished. However, if this BMI is
more than 25, then a person is overweight. Do
remember that this criterion is not applicable to growing
children.
Let each student in a
class find out the weight
and height of three adult
persons of different
economic backgrounds
such as construction
workers, domestic
servants, office workers,
business-persons etc.
Collect the data from
all the students and
make a combined table.
Calculate their BMI. Do
you find any relationship
between economic
background of person and
her/his nutritional status?
2015-2016
14 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Isn’t it surprising that a small
country in our neighbourhood, Sri
Lanka, is much ahead of India in every
respect and a big country like ours has
such a low rank in the world? Table
1.6 also shows that though Nepal has
less than half the per capita income of
India, yet it is not far behind India in
life expectancy and literacy levels.
Many improvements have been
suggested in calculating HDI and
many new components have been
Suppose for the present that a
particular country is quite developed.
We would certainly like this level of
development to go up further or at
least be maintained for future
generations. This is obviously
desirable. However, since the second
half of the twentieth century, a number
of scientists have been warning that
the present type, and levels, of
development are not sustainable.
Example 1: Groundwater in India
“Recent evidence suggests that the groundwater is under
serious threat of overuse in many parts of the country. About
300 districts have reported a water level decline of over 4 metres
during the past 20 years. Nearly one-third of the country is
overusing their groundwater reserves. In another 25 years,
60 per cent of the country would be doing the same if the present
way of using this resource continues. Groundwater overuse is
particularly found in the agriculturally prosperous regions of
Punjab and Western U.P., hard rock plateau areas of central and
south India, some coastal areas and the rapidly growing urban
settlements.”
(a) Why ground water is overused?
(b) Can there be development without overuse?
SUSTAINABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT
added to the Human Development
Report but, by pre-fixing Human to
Development, it has made it very clear
that what is important in
development is what is happening to
citizens of a country. It is people, their
health, their well being, that is most
important.
Do you think there are certain
other aspects that should be
considered in measuring human
development?
LET’S UNDERSTAND WHY
THIS IS SO THROUGH THE FOLLOWING EXAMPLE:
“We have not inherited
the world from our
forefathers — we have
borrowed it from our
children.”
2015-2016
DEVELOPMENT 15
Groundwater is an example of
renewable resources. These resources
are replenished by nature as in the
case of crops and plants. However,
even these resources may be
overused. For example, in the case of
groundwater, if we use more than
what is being replenished by rain then
we would be overusing this resource.
FOR EXAMPLE, CRUDE OIL THAT WE
EXTRACT FROM THE EARTH IS A NON- RENEWABLE RESOURCE. HOWEVER WE
MAY FIND A SOURCE OF OIL THAT WE DID
NOT KNOW OF EARLIER. EXPLORATIONS
ARE BEING UNDERTAKEN ALL THE TIME.
Example 2: Exhaustion of
Natural Resources
Look at the following data for crude oil.
Region/Country Reserves (2013) Number of Years
(Thousand Million Barrels) Reserves will last
Middle East 808.5 78.1
United States of America 44.2 12.1
World 1687.9 53.3
The table gives an estimate of reserves of crude oil (column1). More
important, it also tells us for how many years the stock of crude oil will
last if people continue to extract it at the present rate. The reserves would
last only 53 years more. This is for the world as a whole. However, different
countries face different situations. Countries like India depend on
importing oil from abroad because they do not have enough stocks of
their own. If prices of oil increase this becomes a burden for everyone.
There are countries like USA which have low reserves and hence want
to secure oil through military or economic power.
The question of sustainability of development raises many
fundamentally new issues about the nature and process of development.
(a) Is crude oil essential for the development process in a country? Discuss.
(b) India has to import crude oil. What problems do you anticipate for the
country looking at the above situation?
Non-renewable resources are those
which will get exhausted after years
of use. We have a fixed stock on earth
which cannot be replenished. We do
discover new resources that we did
not know of earlier. New sources in
this way add to the stock. However,
over time, even this will get exhausted.
TABLE 1.7 CRUDE OIL RESERVES
Source : BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2014
2015-2016
EXERCISES
1. Development of a country can generally be determined by
(i) its per capita income
(ii) its average literacy level
(iii) health status of its people
(iv) all the above
2. Which of the following neighbouring countries has better performance in terms of
human development than India?
(i) Bangladesh
(ii) Sri Lanka
(iii) Nepal
(iv) Pakistan
3. Assume there are four families in a country. The average per capita income of
these families is Rs 5000. If the income of three families is Rs 4000, Rs 7000
and Rs 3000 respectively, what is the income of the fourth family?
(i) Rs 7500
(ii) Rs 3000
(iii) Rs 2000
(iv) Rs 6000
4. What is the main criterion used by the World Bank in classifying different
countries? What are the limitations of this criterion, if any?
5. In what respects is the criterion used by the UNDP for measuring development
different from the one used by the World Bank?
6. Why do we use averages? Are there any limitations to their use? Illustrate with
your own examples related to development.
7. Kerala, with lower per capita income has a better human development ranking
than Maharashtra. Hence, per capita income is not a useful criterion at all and
should not be used to compare states. Do you agree? Discuss.
8. Find out the present sources of energy that are used by the people in India. What
could be the other possibilities fifty years from now?
9. Why is the issue of sustainability important for development?
Consequences of environmental
degradation do not respect national
or state boundaries; this issue is
no longer region or nation specific.
Our future is linked together.
Sustainability of development is
comparatively a new area of
knowledge in which scientists,
economists, philosophers and other
social scientists are working
together.
In general, the question of
development or progress is perennial.
At all times as a member of society
and as individuals we need to ask
where we want to go, what we wish to
become and what our goals are. So
the debate on development continues.
16 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
2015-2016
10. “The Earth has enough resources to meet the needs of all but not enough to
satisfy the greed of even one person”. How is this statement relevant to the
disscusion of development? Discuss.
11. List a few examples of environmental degradation that you may have observed
around you.
12. For each of the items given in Table 1.6, find out which country is at the top and
which is at the bottom.
13. The following table shows the proportion of undernourished adults in India. It is
based on a survey of various states for the year 2001. Look at the table and
answer the following questions.
State Male Female
(%) (%)
Kerala 22 19
Karnataka 36 38
Madhya Pradesh 43 42
All States 37 36
DEVELOPMENT 17
(i) Compare the nutritional level of people in Kerala and Madhya Pradesh.
(ii) Can you guess why around 40 per cent of people in the country are
undernourished even though it is argued that there is enough food in the
country? Describe in your own words.
ADDITIONAL PROJECT / ACTIVITY
Invite three different speakers to talk to you about the development of your region. Ask
them all the questions that come to your mind. Discuss these ideas in groups. Each
group should prepare a wall chart, giving reasons about ideas that you agree or do
not agree with.
2015-2016
