The National Curriculum Framework, (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life at
school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure
from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes
a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt
to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different
subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction
of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education
(1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers
will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative
activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children
generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key
reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity
and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning,
not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a
source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The
textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and
activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development team responsible for this book. We
wish to thank the Chairman of the advisory group in science and mathematics, Professor
J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor Rupamanjari Ghosh, School
of Physical Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, for guiding the work of
this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we
are grateful to them and their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to
the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon
their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of
FOREWORD
2021–22
(iv)
the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairmanship
of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and
contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions
which will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

This textbook of Science for Class X is a continuation of our attempt in the Class IX
Science textbook to comply with the guidelines of the National Curriculum
Framework-2005. We had to work within a limited time frame and also had our own
constraints coming in the way of this radical change. The revised and re-structured
syllabus for Class X covers selected topics in the broad themes of — Materials,
The World of the Living, How Things Work, Natural Phenomena and Natural Resources.
We have interpreted the syllabus to present a coherent coverage of scientific concepts
related to our daily life on the select topics. It is an integrated approach to science at
this level, with no sharp divisions into disciplines such as Physics, Chemistry, Biology
and Environmental Science.
There has been a conscious attempt to address the relevant social concerns in this
science textbook wherever possible — the concerns for people with special needs, the
issues of gender discrimination, energy and environment have found their natural
place in this book. Students have been encouraged to get into the debates on some of
the management concerns (for sustainable development, for example) so that they
can arrive at their own decisions after a scientific analysis of all the facts.
This book has some features which are meant to enhance its effectiveness. The
theme of each chapter has been introduced with examples from daily life, and if possible,
by a relevant activity that the students have to perform. The entire approach of the
book is, in fact, activity-based, i.e., the students are required to construct knowledge
themselves from these activities. The emphasis is not on definitions and technical
terms, but on the concepts involved. Special care has been taken so that the rigour of
science is not lost while simplifying the language. Difficult and challenging ideas,
which are not to be covered at this stage, have often been placed as extra material in
the boxes in light orange. The excitement of doing science comes from pursuing the
unknown — the students would have the opportunity to think and explore somewhat
beyond the syllabus and may feel the urge to continue their scientific expedition at
higher levels. All such box items, including brief biography of scientists, are, of course,
non-evaluative.
Solved examples are provided, wherever felt necessary, to clarify a concept. The
in-text questions after a main section are for the students to check their understanding
of the topic. At the end of each chapter, there is a quick review of the important points
covered in the chapter. We have introduced some multiple choice questions in the
exercises. There are problems of different difficulty levels answers to the multiplechoice questions and numericals, and hints for the difficult questions are included at
the end of the book.
PREFACE
2021–22
(vi)
This book has been made possible because of the active participation of many
people. I wish to thank Professor Krishna Kumar, Director, NCERT, Prof. G. Ravindra,
Joint Director, NCERT, and Professor Hukum Singh, Head, Department of Education
in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, specially for their keen interest in the development
of the book and for all the administrative support. I wish to put on record my sincere
appreciation for Dr Anjni Koul, the member-coordinator of the textbook development
committee, for her extraordinary commitment and efficiency. It has been a real pleasure
working with my textbook development team and the review committee. The chosen
editorial team worked extremely hard, on tight deadlines, to bring the book close to
the shape that we dreamt of. Fruitful discussions with some members of the MHRD
Monitoring Committee helped in providing the final touches to the book. I do not have
the words to acknowledge the professional and personal inputs I received from some
of my close friends during the preparation of this book. We warmly welcome comments
and suggestions for improvement from our readers.
RUPAMANJARI GHOSH
Professor of Physics
School of Physical Sciences
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi

CHAIRMAN, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and
Astrophysics (IUCAA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
Rupamanjari Ghosh, Professor, School of Physical Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Alka Mehrotra, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Animesh K. Mohapatra, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Ajmer
B.B. Swain, Professor (Retd.), Department of Physics, Utkal University, Orissa
B.K. Sharma, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
B.K. Tripathi, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Brahm Parkash, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Charu Maini, PGT, Salwan Public School, Gurgaon, Haryana
Dinesh Kumar, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Gagan Gupta, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
H.L. Satheesh, TGT , DM School, Regional Institute of Education, Mysore
Ishwant Kaur, PGT, DM School, Regional Institute of Education, Bhopal
J.D. Arora, Reader, Hindu College, Moradabad, Uttar Pradesh
Meenambika Menon, TGT, Cambridge School, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
Puran Chand, Professor and Jt. Director (Retd.), Central Institute of Educational Technology
NCERT, New Delhi
Reeta Sharma, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhopal
R.P. Singh, Lecturer, Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Kishan Ganj, Delhi
Satyajit Rath, Scientist, National Institute of Immunology, JNU Campus, New Delhi
S.K. Dash, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneswar
Sunita Ramrakhiani, PGT, Ahlcon Public School, Delhi
Uma Sudhir, Eklavya, Indore, Madhya Pradesh
Vandana Saxena, TGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya-4, Kandhar Lines, Delhi Cantt., New Delhi
Vinod Kumar, Reader, Hans Raj College, Delhi University, Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Anjni Koul, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
2021–22
(viii)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), besides expressing
its gratefulness towards the members of the Textbook Development Committee for their
contribution in the development of the Science Textbook for Class X, also acknowledges
the contribution of the following members for reviewing, editing, refining, and finalisation
of the manuscript of the book. Kanhiya Lal, Principal (Retd.), Directorate of Education,
NCT, Delhi; Ranveer Singh, Lecturer, Sarvodaya Bal Vidyalaya, Timarpur, Delhi; Bharat
Poorey, Professor (Retd.), Govt. Post Graduate College, Indore; Gagandeep Bajaj, Lecturer,
S.P.M. College, Delhi University, Delhi; Ravinder Kaur, TGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Rohini,
Delhi; Renu Puri, TGT, N.C. Jindal Public School, New Delhi; Sarita Kumar, Reader,
Acharya Narendra Dev College, Delhi University, Delhi; Shashi Prabha, Lecturer, DESM,
NCERT, Delhi; Rashmi Sharma, Lecturer, NERIE, Shillong; Sushma Jaireth, Reader, DWS,
NCERT, New Delhi; Y.P. Purang, Addl. Director of Education (Retd.), NCT, Delhi; Neeta
Agarwal, TGT, D.L.D.A.V. Model School, Pitampura, Delhi; Roma Anand, TGT, D.L.D.A.V.,
Pitampura, Delhi; Veer Pal Singh, Reader, DEME, NCERT, New Delhi and S.L. Varte,
Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi.
The Council also acknowledges the valuable contribution of Sunita Farkya (Professor,
DESM), Pushplata Verma (Assistant Professor, DESM), K.C. Tripathi (Professor, DEL)
and Jatindra Mohan Misra (Professor, DEL) in updating Chapter 16 titled "Sustainable
Management of Natural Resources", and also in the review of this textbook.
The contribution of R.S. Sindhu, Professor (Retd.), DESM; V.P. Srivastava, Professor
(Retd.), DESM; R.K. Parashar, Rachna Garg (Professors, DESM); V.V. Anand, Professor
(Retd.), RIE Mysore; S.V. Sharma (Professor, RIE Mysore); V.P. Singh (Professor, RIE Ajmer);
R. Joshi, Associate Professor (Retd.), DESM; C.V. Shimray, Ruchi Verma (Associate
Professors, DESM); Ram Babu Pareek (Associate Professor, RIE Ajmer); A.K. Srivastava,
Rejaul Karim Barbhuiya, Pramila Tanwar (Assistant Professors, DESM); R.R. Koireng
(Assistant Professor, DCS); V. Tangpu (Assistant Professor, RIE Mysore) and Akhileshwar
Mishra (Head Master, DMS, RIE Bhubaneswar), in the review of this textbook in 2017-18
are acknowledged.
Special thanks are due to Hukum Singh, Professor and Former Head, DESM, NCERT,
New Delhi, for providing all academic and administrative support.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the support provided by the APC Office of
DESM, administrative staff of DESM; Deepak Kapoor, Incharge, Computer Station, DESM;
Saima and Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators and Rajesh Handa, Illustrator;
Mohd. Qamar Tabrez and Musarrat Parveen, Copy Editors; Seema Yadav, Proof Reader.
The efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT are also highly appreciated.
