You already know that three-fourth of the
earth’s surface is covered with water, but only
a small proportion of it accounts for freshwater
that can be put to use. This freshwater is mainly
obtained from surface run off and ground water
that is continually being renewed and
recharged through the hydrological cycle. All
water moves within the hydrological cycle
ensuring that water is a renewable resource.
You might wonder that if three-fourth of
the world is covered with water and water is a
renewable resource, then how is it that
countries and regions around the globe suffer
from water scarcity? Why is it predicted that
by 2025, nearly two billion people will live in
absolute water scarcity?
Water: Some facts and figures
• 96.5 per cent of the total volume of world’s
water is estimated to exist as oceans and
only 2.5 per cent as freshwater. Nearly
70 per cent of this freshwater occurs as
ice sheets and glaciers in Antarctica,
Greenland and the mountainous regions
of the world, while a little less than 30
per cent is stored as groundwater in the
world’s aquifers.
• India receives nearly 4 per cent of the
global precipitation and ranks 133 in the
world in terms of water availability per
person per annum.
• The total renewable water resources of India
are estimated at 1,897 sq km per annum.
2015-16
24 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
associate it with regions having low rainfall
or those that are drought prone. We
instantaneously visualise the deserts of
Rajasthan and women balancing many
‘matkas’ (earthen pots) used for collecting and
storing water and travelling long distances to
get water. True, the availability of water
resources varies over space and time, mainly
due to the variations in seasonal and annual
precipitation, but water scarcity in most cases
is caused by over- exploitation, excessive use
and unequal access to water among different
social groups.
Fig. 3.1: Water Scarcity
• By 2025, it is predicted that large parts of
India will join countries or regions having
absolute water scarcity.
Source: The UN World Water Development
Report, 2003
WATER SCARCITY AND THE NEED FOR WATER
CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT
Given the abundance and renewability of
water, it is difficult to imagine that we may
suffer from water scarcity. The moment we
speak of water shortages, we immediately
Water, Water Everywhere, Not a Drop to Drink:
After a heavy downpour, a boy collects drinking
water in Kolkata. Life in the city and its adjacent
districts was paralysed as incessant overnight rain,
meaning a record 180 mm, flooded vast area and
disruted traffic.
A Kashmiri earthquake survivor carries water in
the snow in a devastated village.
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES 25
requirements but have further aggravated the
problem. If you look into the housing
societies or colonies in the cities, you would
find that most of these have their own
groundwater pumping devices to meet their
water needs. Not surprisingly, we find that
fragile water resources are being over -
exploited and have caused their depletion in
several of these cities.
So far we have focused on the quantitative
aspects of water scarcity. Now, let us consider
another situation where water is sufficiently
available to meet the needs of the people,
but, the area still suffers from water scarcity.
This scarcity may be due to bad quality of
water. Lately, there has been a growing
concern that even if there is ample water to
meet the needs of the people, much of it may
be polluted by domestic and industrial
wastes, chemicals, pesticides and fertilisers
used in agriculture, thus, making it
hazardous for human use.
Where is then water scarcity likely to
occur? As you have read in the hydrological
cycle, freshwater can be obtained directly
from precipitation, surface run off and
groundwater.
Is it possible that an area or region may
have ample water resources but is still facing
water scarcity? Many of our cities are such
examples. Thus, water scarcity may be an
outcome of large and growing population and
consequent greater demands for water, and
unequal access to it. A large population means
more water not only for domestic use but also
to produce more food. Hence, to facilitate
higher food-grain production, water resources
are being over-exploited to expand irrigated
areas and dry-season agriculture. You may
have seen in many television advertisements
that most farmers have their own wells and
tube-wells in their farms for irrigation to
increase their produce. But have you ever
wondered what this could result in? That it
may lead to falling groundwater levels,
adversely affecting water availability and food
security of the people.
Post-independent India witnessed
intensive industrialisation and urbanisation,
creating vast opportunities for us. Today,
large industrial houses are as commonplace
as the industrial units of many MNCs
(Multinational Corporations). The everincreasing number of industries has made
matters worse by exerting pressure on
existing freshwater resources. Industries,
apart from being heavy users of water, also
require power to run them. Much of this
energy comes from hydroelectric power.
Today, in India hydroeclectric power
contributes approximately 22 per cent of the
total electricity produced. Moreover,
multiplying urban centres with large and
dense populations and urban lifestyles have
not only added to water and energy
According to Falkenmark, a Swedish expert,
water stress occurs when water availability
is between 1,000 and 1,600 cubic metre per
person per year.
India’s rivers, especially the smaller ones,
have all turned into toxic streams. And even
the big ones like the Ganga and Yamuna
are far from being pure. The assault on
India’s rivers – from population growth,
agricultural modernisation, urbanisation and
industrialisation – is enormous and growing
by the day….. This entire life stands
threatened.
Source: The Citizens’ Fifth Report, CSE, 1999.
You may have already realised that the
need of the hour is to conserve and manage
our water resources, to safeguard ourselves
from health hazards, to ensure food security,
continuation of our livelihoods and
productive activities and also to prevent
degradation of our natural ecosystems. Over
exploitation and mismanagement of water
resources will impoverish this resource and
cause ecological crisis that may have
profound impact on our lives.
From your everyday experiences, write a short
proposal on how you can conserve water.
2015-16
26 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
MULTI -PURPOSE RIVER PROJECTS AND
INTEGRATED WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
But, how do we conserve and manage water?
Archaeological and historical records show that
from ancient times we have been constructing
sophisticated hydraulic structures like dams
built of stone rubble, reservoirs or lakes,
embankments and canals for irrigation. Not
surprisingly, we have continued this tradition
in modern India by building dams in most of
our river basins.
What are dams and how do they help us
in conserving and managing water? Dams
were traditionally built to impound rivers and
rainwater that could be used later to irrigate
agricultural fields. Today, dams are built not
just for irrigation but for electricity generation,
water supply for domestic and industrial
uses, flood control, recreation, inland
navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are
now referred to as multi-purpose projects
where the many uses of the impounded water
are integrated with one another. For example,
in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra –
Nangal project water is being used both for
hydel power production and irrigation.
Similarly, the Hirakud project in the
Mahanadi basin integrates conservation of
water with flood control.
Hydraulic Structures in Ancient India
• In the first century B.C., Sringaverapura
near Allahabad had sophisticated water
harvesting system channelling the flood
water of the river Ganga.
• During the time of Chandragupta Maurya,
dams, lakes and irrigation systems were
extensively built.
• Evidences of sophisticated irrigation works
have also been found in Kalinga,
(Odisha), Nagarjunakonda (Andhra
Pradesh), Bennur (Karnataka), Kolhapur
(Maharashtra), etc.
• In the 11th Century, Bhopal Lake, one of the
largest artificial lakes of its time was built.
• In the 14th Century, the tank in Hauz Khas,
Delhi was constructed by Iltutmish for
supplying water to Siri Fort area.
Source: Dying Wisdom, CSE, 1997.
Fig. 3.2: Hirakud Dam
A dam is a barrier across flowing water that
obstructs, directs or retards the flow, often
creating a reservoir, lake or impoundment.
“Dam” refers to the reservoir rather than the
structure. Most dams have a section called a
spillway or weir over which or through which
it is intended that water will flow either
intermittently or continuously. Dams are
classified according to structure, intended
purpose or height. Based on structure and
the materials used, dams are classified as
timber dams, embankment dams or masonry
dams, with several subtypes. According to
the height, dams can be categorised as large
dams and major dams or alternatively as low
dams, medium height dams and high dams.
Multi-purpose projects, launched after
Independence with their integrated water
resources management approach, were
thought of as the vehicle that would lead the
nation to development and progress,
overcoming the handicap of its colonial past.
Jawaharlal Nehru proudly proclaimed the
dams as the ‘temples of modern India’; the
reason being that it would integrate
development of agriculture and the village
economy with rapid industrialisation and
growth of the urban economy.
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES 27
In recent years, multi-purpose projects and
large dams have come under great scrutiny
and opposition for a variety of reasons.
Regulating and damming of rivers affect their
natural flow causing poor sediment flow and
excessive sedimentation at the bottom of the
reservoir, resulting in rockier stream beds and
poorer habitats for the rivers’ aquatic life. Dams
also fragment rivers making it difficult for
aquatic fauna to migrate, especially for
spawning. The reservoirs that are created on
the floodplains also submerge the existing
vegetation and soil leading to its decomposition
over a period of time.
Multi-purpose projects and large dams
have also been the cause of many new social
movements like the ‘Narmada Bachao Andolan’
and the ‘Tehri Dam Andolan’ etc. Resistance
to these projects has primarily been due to the
large-scale displacement of local communities.
Local people often had to give up their land,
livelihood and their meagre access and control
over resources for the greater good of the
nation. So, if the local people are not benefiting
from such projects then who is benefited?
Perhaps, the landowners and large farmers,
industrialists and few urban centres. Take the
case of the landless in a village – does he really
gain from such a project?
Irrigation has also changed the cropping
pattern of many regions with farmers shifting
to water intensive and commercial crops. This
has great ecological consequences like
salinisation of the soil. At the same time, it has
transformed the social landscape i.e.
increasing the social gap between the richer
landowners and the landless poor. As we can
see, the dams did create conflicts between
people wanting different uses and benefits from
the same water resources. In Gujarat, the
Sabarmati-basin farmers were agitated and
almost caused a riot over the higher priority
given to water supply in urban areas,
particularly during droughts. Inter-state water
disputes are also becoming common with
regard to sharing the costs and benefits of the
multi-purpose project.
Find out more about any one traditional
method of building dams and irrigation works.
We have sown the crops in Asar
We will bring Bhadu in Bhadra
Floods have swollen the Damodar
The sailing boats cannot sail
Oh! Damodar, we fall at your feet
Reduce the floods a little
Bhadu will come a year later
Let the boats sail on your surface
(This popular Bhadu song in the Damodar valley
region narrates the troubles faced by people
owing to the flooding of Damodar river known
as the river of sorrow.)
Narmada Bachao Andolan or Save
Narmada Movement is a Non
Governmental Organisation (NGO) that
mobilised tribal people, farmers,
environmentalists and human rights
activists against the Sardar Sarovar Dam
being built across the Narmada river in
Gujarat. It originally focused on the
environmental issues related to trees that
would be submerged under the dam
water. Recently it has re-focused the
aim to enable poor citizens, especially
the oustees (displaced people) to get
full rehabilitation facilities from
the government.
People felt that their suffering would not
be in vain… accepted the trauma of
displacement believing in the promise of
irrigated fields and plentiful harvests. So,
often the survivors of Rihand told us that they
accepted their sufferings as sacrifice for the
sake of their nation. But now, after thirty bitter
years of being adrift, their livelihood having
even being more precarious, they keep
asking: “Are we the only ones chosen to
make sacrifices for the nation?”
Source: S. Sharma, quoted in In the Belly of the
River. Tribal conflicts over development in Narmada
valley, A. Baviskar, 1995.
2015-16
28 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India: Major Rivers and Dams
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES 29
Most of the objections to the projects arose
due to their failure to achieve the purposes for
which they were built. Ironically, the dams that
were constructed to control floods have
Make a list of inter-state water disputes.
Do you know that the Krishna-Godavari
dispute is due to the objections raised by
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh
governments? It is regarding the diversion
of more water at Koyna by the Maharashtra
government for a multipurpose project. This
would reduce downstream flow in their
states with adverse consequences for
agriculture and industry.
triggered floods due to sedimentation in the
reservoir. Moreover, the big dams have mostly
been unsuccessful in controlling floods at the
time of excessive rainfall. You may have seen
or read how the release of water from dams
during heavy rains aggravated the flood
situation in Maharashtra and Gujarat in 2006.
The floods have not only devastated life and
property but also caused extensive soil erosion.
Sedimentation also meant that the flood plains
were deprived of silt, a natural fertiliser, further
adding on to the problem of land degradation.
It was also observed that the multi-purpose
projects induced earthquakes, caused waterborne diseases and pests and pollution
resulting from excessive use of water.
RAINWATER HARVESTING
Many thought that given the disadvantages
and rising resistance against the multiCollect information about flood prone areas of the country
2015-16
30 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
• Roof top rain water is collected using a PVC pipe
• Filtered using sand and bricks
• Underground pipe takes water to sump for
immediate usage
• Excess water from the sump is taken to the well
• Water from the well recharges the underground
• Take water from the well (later)
(b) Recharge through Abandoned Dugwell
Fig 3.4: Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting
purpose projects, water harvesting system
was a viable alternative, both socioeconomically and environmentally. In ancient
India, along with the sophisticated hydraulic
structures, there existed an extraordinary
tradition of water-harvesting system. People
had in-depth knowledge of rainfall regimes
and soil types and developed wide ranging
techniques to harvest rainwater, groundwater,
river water and flood water in keeping with
the local ecological conditions and their water
needs. In hill and mountainous regions,
people built diversion channels like the ‘guls’
or ‘kuls’ of the Western Himalayas for
agriculture. ‘Rooftop rain water harvesting’
was commonly practised to store drinking
water, particularly in Rajasthan. In the flood
plains of Bengal, people developed inundation
channels to irrigate their fields. In arid and
semi-arid regions, agricultural fields were
converted into rain fed storage structures that
allowed the water to stand and moisten the
soil like the ‘khadins’ in Jaisalmer and ‘Johads’
in other parts of Rajasthan.
Fig. 3.3
(a) Recharge through Hand Pump
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES 31
Fig 3.5: Traditional method of rain water harvesting
A kul leads to a circular village tank, as the above
in the Kaza village, from which water is released as
and when required.
In the semi-arid and arid regions of
Rajasthan, particularly in Bikaner, Phalodi and
Barmer, almost all the houses traditionally had
underground tanks or tankas for storing
drinking water. The tanks could be as large as
a big room; one household in Phalodi had a tank
that was 6.1 metres deep, 4.27 metres long and
2.44 metres wide. The tankas were part of the
well-developed rooftop rainwater harvesting
system and were built inside the main house or
the courtyard. They were connected to the
sloping roofs of the houses through a pipe. Rain
falling on the rooftops would travel down the
pipe and was stored in these underground
‘tankas’. The first spell of rain was usually not
collected as this would clean the roofs and the
pipes. The rainwater from the subsequent
showers was then collected.
The rainwater can be stored in the tankas
till the next rainfall making it an extremely
reliable source of drinking water when all other
sources are dried up, particularly in the
summers. Rainwater, or palar pani, as
commonly referred to in these parts, is
considered the purest form of natural water.
Many houses constructed underground rooms
adjoining the ‘tanka’ to beat the summer heat
as it would keep the room cool.
Roof top rain water harvesting is the most
common practice in Shillong, Meghalaya.
It is interesting because Cherapunjee and
Mawsynram situated at a distance of 55
km. from Shillong receive the highest
rainfall in the world, yet the state capital
Shillong faces acute shortage of water.
Nearly every household in the city has a
roof top rain water harvesting structure.
Nearly 15-25 per cent of the total water
requirement of the household comes from
roof top water harvesting.
Today, in western Rajasthan, sadly the
practice of rooftop rainwater harvesting is on the
decline as plenty of water is available due to the
perennial Rajasthan Canal, though some houses
still maintain the tankas since they do not like
the taste of tap water. Fortunately, in many parts
of rural and urban India, rooftop rainwater
harvesting is being successfully adapted to store
and conserve water. In Gendathur, a remote
backward village in Mysuru, Karnataka, villagers
have installed, in their household’s rooftop,
rainwater harvesting system to meet their water
needs. Nearly 200 households have installed this
system and the village has earned the rare
distinction of being rich in rainwater. See Fig. 3.6
for a better understanding of the rooftop
Find out other rainwater harvesting systems
existing in and around your locality.
Fig. 3.6
Rooftop harvesting was common across the towns
and villages of the Thar. Rainwater that falls on
the sloping roofs of houses is taken through a pipe
into an underground tanka (circular holes in the
ground). built in the main house or in the courtyard.
The picture above shows water being taken from a
neighbour’s roof through a long pipe. Here the
neighbour’s rooftop has been used for collection of
rainwater. The picture shows a hole through which
rainwater flows down into an underground tanka.
2015-16
32 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Fig 3.7
BAMBOO DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM
In Meghalaya, a 200-year-old system of tapping stream
and spring water by using bamboo pipes, is prevalent.
About 18-20 litres of water enters the bamboo pipe system,
gets transported over hundreds of metres, and finally
reduces to 20-80 drops per minute at the site of the plant.
Picture 2 and 3: The channel sections, made of bamboo, divert water
to the plant site where it is distributed into branches, again made and
laid out with different forms of bamboo pipes. The flow of water into
the pipes is controlled by manipulating the pipe positions.
Picture 1: Bamboo pipes are used to divert perennial springs on
the hilltops to the lower reaches by gravity.
Picture 5 and 6
Reduced channel sections
and diversion units are
used at the last stage of
water application. The last
channel section enables
water to be dropped near
the roots of the plant.
Picture 4: If the pipes pass a road,
they are taken high above the land.
Tamil Nadu is the first state in India which
has made roof top rainwater harvesting
structure compulsory to all the houses
across the state. There are legal provisions
to punish the defaulters.
rainwater harvesting system which is adapted
here. Gendathur receives an annual precipitation
of 1,000 mm, and with 80 per cent of collection
efficiency and of about 10 fillings, every house
can collect and use about 50,000 litres of water
annually. From the 20 houses, the net amount
of rainwater harvested annually amounts to
1,00,000 litres.
2015-16
WATER RESOURCES 33
EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Based on the information given below classify each of the situations as
‘suffering from water scarcity’ or ‘not suffering from water scarcity’.
(a) Region with high annual rainfall.
(b) Region having high annual rainfall and large population.
(c) Region having high annual rainfall but water is highly polluted.
(d) Region having low rainfall and low population.
(ii) Which one of the following statements is not an argument in favour of multipurpose river projects?
(a) Multi-purpose projects bring water to those areas which suffer from
water scarcity.
(b) Multi-purpose projects by regulating water flow helps to control floods.
(c) Multi-purpose projects lead to large scale displacements and loss of
livelihood.
(d) Multi-purpose projects generate electricity for our industries and our
homes.
(iii) Here are some false statements. Identify the mistakes and rewrite them
correctly.
(a) Multiplying urban centres with large and dense populations and urban
lifestyles have helped in proper utilisation of water resources.
(b) Regulating and damming of rivers does not affect the river’s natural
flow and its sediment flow.
(c) In Gujarat, the Sabarmati basin farmers were not agitated when higher
priority was given to water supply in urban areas, particularly during
droughts.
(d) Today in Rajasthan, the practice of rooftop rainwater water harvesting
has gained popularity despite high water availability due to the
Rajasthan Canal.
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Explain how water becomes a renewable resource.
(ii) What is water scarcity and what are its main causes?
(iii) Compare the advantages and disadvantages of multi-purpose river projects.
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Discuss how rainwater harvesting in semi-arid regions of Rajasthan is
carried out.
(ii) Describe how modern adaptations of traditional rainwater harvesting
methods are being carried out to conserve and store water.
1. Collect information on how industries are polluting our water resources.
2. Enact with your classmates a scene of water dispute in your locality.
2015-16
