We use different materials and services in our
daily life. Some of these are available in our
immediate surroundings, while other
requirements are met by bringing things from
other places. Goods and services do not move
from supply locales to demand locales on their
own. The movement of these goods and services
from their supply locations to demand locations
necessitates the need for transport. Some people
are engaged in facilitating these movements.
These are known to be traders who make the
products come to the consumers by
transportation. Thus, the pace of development
of a country depends upon the production of
goods and services as well as their movement
over space. Therefore, efficient means of transport
are pre-requisites for fast development.
Movement of these goods and services can be
over three important domains of our earth i.e. land,
water and air. Based on these, transport can also
be classified into land, water and air transport.
expanded far and wide. Today, the world has
been converted into a large village with the help
of efficient and fast moving transport.
Transport has been able to achieve this with
the help of equally developed communication
system. Therefore, transport, communication
and trade are complementary to each other.
Today, India is well-linked with the rest of
the world despite its vast size, diversity and
linguistic and socio-cultural plurality.
Railways, airways, water ways, newspapers,
radio, television, cinema and internet, etc. have
been contributing to its socio-economic
progress in many ways. The trades from local
to international levels have added to the vitality
of its economy. It has enriched our life and
added substantially to growing amenities and
facilities for the comforts of life.
In this chapter, you will see how modern
means of transport and communication serve
as life lines of our nation and its modern
Fig. 7.1
For a long time, trade and transport were
restricted to a limited space. With the
development in science and technology, the
area of influence of trade and transport
economy. It is thus, evident that a dense and
efficient network of transport and
communication is a pre-requisite for local,
national and global trade of today.
2015-16
82 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
TRANSPORT
Roadways
India has one of the largest road networks in
the world, aggregating to about 2.3 million km
at present. In India, roadways have preceded
railways. They still have an edge over railways
in view of the ease with which they can be built
and maintained. The growing importance of
road transport vis-à-vis rail transport is rooted
in the following reasons; (a) construction cost of
roads is much lower than that of railway lines,
(b) roads can traverse comparatively more
dissected and undulating topography, (c) roads
can negotiate higher gradients of slopes and as
such can traverse mountains such as the
Himalayas, (d) road transport is economical in
transportation of few persons and relatively
smaller amount of goods over short distances,
(e) it also provides door-to-door service, thus
the cost of loading and unloading is much lower,
(f) road transport is also used as a feeder to other
modes of transport such as they provide a link
between railway stations, air and sea ports.
In India, roads are classified in the following
six classes according to their capacity. Look at
the map of the National Highways and find out
about the significant role played by these roads.
• Golden Quadrilateral Super Highways:
The government has launched a major road
development project linking Delhi-KolkataChennai-Mumbai and Delhi by six-lane
Super Highways. The North-South corridors
linking Srinagar (Jammu & Kashmir) and
Kanyakumari (Tamil Nadu), and East-West
Corridor connecting Silcher (Assam) and
Porbander (Gujarat) are part of this project.
The major objective of these Super Highways
is to reduce the time and distance between
the mega cities of India. These highway
projects are being implemented by the
National Highway Authority of India (NHAI).
• National Highways: National Highways
link extreme parts of the country. These are
the primary road systems and are laid and
maintained by the Central Public Works
Department (CPWD). A number of major
National Highways run in North-South and
East-West directions. The historical Sher-
• State Highways: Roads linking a state
capital with different district headquarters
are known as State Highways. These roads
are constructed and maintained by the State
Public Works Department (PWD) in State
and Union Territories.
• District Roads: These roads connect the
district headquarters with other places of the
district. These roads are maintained by the
Zila Parishad.
• Other Roads: Rural roads, which link rural
areas and villages with towns, are classified
under this category. These roads received
special impetus under the Pradhan Mantri
Grameen Sadak Yojana. Under this scheme
special provisions are made so that every village
in the country is linked to a major town in the
country by an all season motorable road.
Fig.7.2: Ahmedabad- Vadodara Expressway
Find out places linked by the National
Highway 2 and 3.
Do you know that National Highway-7
is the longest and traverses 2, 369 km
between Varanasi and Kanyakumari
via Jabalpur, Nagpur, Hyderabad,
Bangalore and Madurai. Delhi and
Mumbai are connected by National
Highway-8, while National Highway-15
covers most of Rajasthan.
Shah Suri Marg is called National Highway
No.1, between Delhi and Amritsar.
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 83
India: National Highways
2015-16
84 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
• Border Roads: Apart from these, Border
Roads Organisation a Government of India
undertaking constructs and maintains
roads in the bordering areas of the country.
This organisation was established in 1960
for the development of the roads of strategic
importance in the northern and northeastern border areas. These roads have
improved accessibility in areas of difficult
terrain and have helped in the economic
development of these area.
The Indian Railways is the largest public
sector undertaking in the country. The first
train steamed off from Mumbai to Thane in
1853, covering a distance of 34 km.
these are all weather roads. Unmetalled roads
go out of use in the rainy season.
Road Density
The length of road per 100 sq. km of area
is known as density of roads. Distribution
of road is not uniform in the country. Density
of all roads varies from only 12.14 km in
Jammu and Kashmir to 517.77 km in Kerala
(as on 31 March 2011) with the national
average of 142.68 km (31 March 2011). Road
transportation in India faces a number of
problems. Keeping in view the volume of
traffic and passengers, the road network is
inadequate. About half of the roads are
unmetalled and this limits their usage
during the rainy season. The National
Highways are inadequate too. Moreover, the
roadways are highly congested in cities and
most of the bridges and culverts are old
and narrow. However, in recent years fast
development of road network has taken place
in different parts of the country
Railways
Railways are the principal mode of
transportation for freight and passengers in
India. Railways also make it possible to
conduct multifarious activities like business,
sightseeing, pilgrimage along with
transportation of goods over longer
distances. Apart from an important means
of transport the Indian Railways have been
a great integrating force for more than 150
years. Railways in India bind the economic
life of the country as well as accelerate the
development of the industry and agriculture.
The Indian Railway have a network of 7,133
stations spread over a route length of 64,460
km with a fleet of 9,213 locomotives, 53,220
passenger service vehicles, 6,493 other coach
vehicles and 2,29,381 wagons as on March
2011.
Fig. 7.3: Hilly Tracts
Fig. 7.4: Traffic on north-eastern border road
(Arunachal Pradesh)
Roads can also be classified on the basis of
the type of material used for their construction
such as metalled and unmetalled roads.
Metalled roads may be made of cement,
concrete or even bitumen of coal, therefore,
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 85
Find out the current Railway zones and their
headquarters. Also locate the headquarters
of Railway zones on the map of India.
Source: Railway year book 2010-11, Ministry of Railways, Govt. of India.
The Indian Railway is now reorganised into
16 zones.
The distribution pattern of the Railway
network in the country has been largely
influenced by physiographic, economic and
administrative factors. The northern plains with
their vast level land, high population density
and rich agricultural resources provided the
most favourable condition for their growth.
However, a large number of rivers requiring
construction of bridges across their wide beds
posed some obstacles. In the hilly terrains of
the peninsular region, railway tracts are laid
through low hills, gaps or tunnels. The
Himalayan mountainous regions too are
unfavourable for the construction of railway
lines due to high relief, sparse population and
lack of economic opportunities. Likewise, it was
difficult to lay railway lines on the sandy plain
of western Rajasthan, swamps of Gujarat,
forested tracks of Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Jharkhand. The
contiguous stretch of Sahyadri could be crossed
only through gaps or passes (Ghats). In recent
times, the development of the Konkan railway
along the west coast has facilitated the
movement of passengers and goods in this most
important economic region of India. It has also
faced a number of problem such as sinking of
track in some stretches and land slides.
Today, the railways have become more
important in our national economy than all
other means of transport put together. However,
rail transport suffers from certain problems as
well. Many passengers travel without tickets.
Thefts and damaging of railway property has
not yet stopped completely. People stop the
trains, pull the chain unnecessarily and this
causes heavy damage to the railway. Think
over it, how we can help our railway in running
as per the scheduled time?
Pipelines
Pipeline transport network is a new arrival on
the transportation map of India. In the past,
these were used to transport water to cities and
industries. Now, these are used for
transporting crude oil, petroleum products and
natural gas from oil and natural gas fields to
refineries, fertilizer factories and big thermal
power plants. Solids can also be transported
through a pipeline when converted into slurry.
The far inland locations of refineries like
Barauni, Mathura, Panipat and gas based
fertilizer plants could be thought of only
because of pipelines. Initial cost of laying
pipelines is high but subsequent running
costs are minimal. It rules out trans-shipment
losses or delays.
There are three important networks of
pipeline transportation in the country.
• From oil field in upper Assam to Kanpur
(Uttar Pradesh), via Guwahati, Barauni and
Allahabad. It has branches from Barauni to
Haldia, via Rajbandh, Rajbandh to
Maurigram and Guwahati to Siliguri.
Gauge in metres Route (Km) Running Track (Km) Total Track (Km.)
Broad Gauge (1.676) 55,188 77,347 102,680
Metre Gauge (1.000) 6,809 7219 8561
Narrow Gauge (0.762 and 0.610) 2,463 2474 2753
Total 64460 87040 113994
Table 7.1: India: Railway Track
The Indian Railway network runs on multiple gauge operations
extending over 64460 km (Provisional) (excluding Metro Kolkata)
2015-16
86 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India: Railways
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 87
Fig. 7.5: Inland waterways widely used in
north-eastern states
• From Salaya in Gujarat to Jalandhar in
Punjab, via Viramgam, Mathura, Delhi and
Sonipat. It has branches to connect Koyali
(near Vadodara, Gujarat) Chakshu and
other places.
• Gas pipeline from Hazira in Gujarat
connects Jagdishpur in Uttar Pradesh, via
Vijaipur in Madhya Pradesh. It has branches
to Kota in Rajasthan, Shahajahanpur,
Babrala and other places in Uttar Pradesh.
Waterways
Since time immemorial, India was one of the
seafaring countries. Its seamen sailed far and
near, thus, carrying and spreading Indian
commerce and culture. Waterways are the
cheapest means of transport. They are most
suitable for carrying heavy and bulky goods.
It is a fuel-efficient and environment friendly
mode of transport. India has inland navigation
waterways of 14,500 km in length. Out of
these only 5685 km are navigable by
mechanised vessels. The following waterways
have been declared as the National Waterways
by the Government.
and Brahmani rivers and East Coast Canal
(588 km) – N.W. No.5
There are some other inland water ways on
which substantial transportation takes place.
These are Mandavi, Zuari and Cumberjua,
Sunderbans, Barak, backwaters of Kerala and
tidal stretches of some other rivers.
Apart from these, India’s trade with foreign
countries is carried from the ports located along
the coast. 95 per cent of the country’s trade
volume (68 per cent in terms of value) is moved
by sea.
Major Sea Ports
With a long coastline of 7,516.6 km, India is
dotted with 12 major and 187, notified nonmajors (minor/intermediate) ports. These
major ports handle 95 per cent of India’s foreign
trade.
Kandla in Kuchchh was the first port
developed soon after Independence to ease the
volume of trade on the Mumbai port, in the
wake of loss of Karachi port to Pakistan after
the Partition. Kandla is a tidal port. It caters to
the convenient handling of exports and imports
of highly productive granary and industrial belt
• The Ganga river between Allahabad and
Haldia (1620 km)-N.W. No.1
• The Brahmaputra river between Sadiya and
Dhubri (891 km)-N.W. No.2
• The West-Coast Canal in Kerala
(Kottapurma-Kollam, Udyogamandal and
Champakkara canals-205 km) – N.W. No.3
• Specified stretches of Godavari and Krishna
rivers along with Kakinada Puducherry
stretch of canals (1078 km) – N.W. No.4
• Specified stretches of river Brahmani along
with Matai river, delta channels of Mahanadi
stretching across the states of Jammu and
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana,
Rajasthan and Gujarat.
Mumbai is the biggest port with a spacious
natural and well-sheltered harbour. The
Jawaharlal Nehru port was planned with a view
to decongest the Mumbai port and serve as a
hub port for this region. Marmagao port (Goa)
Fig. 7.6: Trucks being driven into the vessel at
Mumbai port
2015-16
88 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Airways
The air travel, today, is the fastest, most
comfortable and prestigious mode of transport.
It can cover very difficult terrains like high
mountains, dreary deserts, dense forests and
also long oceanic stretches with great ease.
Think of the north-eastern part of the country,
marked with the presence of big rivers,
dissected relief, dense forests and frequent
is the premier iron ore exporting port of the
country. This port accounts for about fifty per
cent of India’s iron ore export. New Mangalore
port, located in Karnataka caters to the export
of iron ore concentrates from Kudremukh
mines. Kochchi is the extreme south-western
port, located at the entrance of a lagoon with a
natural harbour.
Moving along the east coast, you would see
the extreme south-eastern port of Tuticorin, in
Tamil Nadu. This port has a natural harbour
and rich hinterland. Thus, it has a flourishing
trade handling of a large variety of cargoes to
even our neighbouring countries like Sri Lanka,
Maldives, etc. and the coastal regions of India.
Chennai is one of the oldest artificial ports of
the country. It is ranked next to Mumbai in terms
of the volume of trade and cargo.
Vishakhapatnam is the deepest landlocked and
well-protected port. This port was, originally,
conceived as an outlet for iron ore exports.
Paradwip port located in Odisha, specialises in
the export of iron ore. Kolkata is an inland
Fig. 7.7: Tanker discharging crude oil at New
Mangalore port
Fig. 7.8: Handling of oversize cargo at Tuticorin port
Fig. 7.9
floods and international frontiers, etc. in the
absence of air transport. Air travel has made
access easier.
The air transport was nationalised in 1953.
On the operational side, Indian Airlines,
Alliance Air (subsidiary of Indian Airlines),
private scheduled airlines and non- scheduled
operators provide domestic air services. Air
India provides international air services.
Pawanhans Helicopters Ltd. provides
helicopter services to Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation in its off-shore operations, to
inaccessible areas and difficult terrains like the
north-eastern states and the interior parts of
Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and
Uttarakhand. Indian Airlines operations also
extend to the neighbouring countries of South
and south-east Asia and the Middle east.
Find out the names of the countries connected
by Indian Airlines.
Air travel is not within the reach of the
common people. It is only in the north-eastern
states that special provisions are made to
extend the services to the common people.
riverine port. This port serves a very large and
rich hinterland of Ganga- Brahmaputra basin.
Being a tidal port, it requires constant dredging
of Hoogly. Haldia port was developed as a
subsidiary port, in order to relieve growing
pressure on the Kolkata port.
Why is air travel preferred in the northeastern states?
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 89
India: Major Ports and International Airports
2015-16
90 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Communication
Ever since humans appeared on the earth, they
have used different means of communication.
But, the pace of change, has been rapid in
modern times. Long distance communication
is far easier without physical movement of the
communicator or receiver. Personal
communication and mass communication
including television, radio, press, films, etc. are
the major means of communication in the
country. The Indian postal network is the largest
in the world. It handles parcels as well as
personal written communications. Cards and
envelopes are considered first–class mail and
are airlifted between stations covering both land
and air. The second–class mail includes book
packets, registered newspapers and periodicals.
They are carried by surface mail, covering land
and water transport. To facilitate quick delivery
of mails in large towns and cities, six mail
channels have been introduced recently. They
are called Rajdhani Channel, Metro Channel,
Green Channel, Business Channel, Bulk Mail
Channel and Periodical Channel.
order to strengthen the flow of information
from the grassroot to the higher level, the
government has made special provision to
extend twenty-four hours STD facility to
every village in the country. There is a uniform
rate of STD facilities all over India. It has
been made possible by integrating the
development in space technology with
communication technology.
Mass communication provides
entertainment and creates awareness among
people about various national programmes and
policies. It includes radio, television,
newspapers, magazines, books and films. All
India Radio (Akashwani) broadcasts a variety
of programmes in national, regional and local
languages for various categories of people,
spread over different parts of the country.
Doordarshan, the national television channel of
India, is one of the largest terrestrial networks
in the world. It broadcasts a variety of
programmes from entertainment, educational
to sports, etc. for people of different age groups.
India publishes a large number of
newspapers and periodicals annually. They are
of different types depending upon their
periodicity. Newspapers are published in
about 100 languages and dialects. Did you
know that the largest number of newspapers
published in the country are in Hindi, followed
by English and Urdu? India is the largest
producer of feature films in the world. It
produces short films; video feature films and
video short films. The Central Board of Film
Certification is the authority to certify both
Indian and foreign films.
International Trade
The exchange of goods among people, states
and countries is referred to as trade. The market
is the place where such exchanges take place.
Trade between two countries is called
international trade. It may take place through
sea, air or land routes. While local trade is
carried in cities, towns and villages, state level
trade is carried between two or more states.
Advancement of international trade of a
country is an index to its economic prosperity.
It is, therefore, considered the economic
barometer for a country.
Till March 2010, 548.32 million mobile
connections were in India. Make a
comparison with any other country of
your choice.
Fig.7.10 : Emergency call box on NH-8
India has one of the largest telecom
networks in Asia. Excluding urban places
more than two-thirds of the villages in India
have already been covered with Subscriber
Trunk Dialling (STD) telephone facility. In
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 91
As the resources are space bound, no
country can survive without international
trade. Export and import are the components
of trade. The balance of trade of a country is
the difference between its export and import.
When the value of export exceeds the value of
imports, it is called a favourable balance of
trade. On the contrary, if the value of imports
exceeds the value of exports, it is termed as
unfavourable balance of trade.
India has trade relations with all the major
trading blocks and all geographical regions of
the world. Among the commodities in export
the share of agriculture and allied products
has been 9.9 per cent, ores and minerals 4.0%,
gems and jewellery 14.7 per cent, petroleum
products (including coal) 16.8 per cent in
2010-11.
The commodities imported to India include
petroleum and petroleum products (28.6 per
cent), pearls and precious stones (9.4 per cent),
chemicals (5.2 per cent), coal, coke and
briquettes (2.7 per cent), machinery (6.4 per
cent) in 2010-11. Bulk imports as a group
registered a growth accounting for 28.2 per
cent of total imports. This group includes
fertilizers (3.4 per cent), cereals (14.3 per cent),
edible oils (17.4 per cent) and newsprint (Paper
board manufacture and newsprint 40.3 per
cent) in 2010-11. International trade has
under gone a sea change in the last fifteen
years. Exchange of commodities and goods
have been superseded by the exchange of
information and knowledge. India has emerged
as a software giant at the international level
and it is earning large foreign exchange through
the export of information technology.
Tourism as a Trade
Tourism in India has grown substantially over
the last three decades. Foreign tourist’s arrivals
in the country witnessed an increase of 11.8
per cent during the year 2010 as against the
year 2009, contributing Rs 64,889 crore of
foreign exchange in 2010.
5.78 million foreign tourists visited India
in 2010. More than 15 million people are
directly engaged in the tourism industry.
Prepare a project on the heritage tourism in India
2015-16
92 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Tourism also promotes national integration,
provides support to local handicrafts and
cultural pursuits. It also helps in the
development of international understanding
about our culture and heritage. Foreign
tourists visit India for heritage tourism, eco
tourism, adventure tourism, cultural tourism,
medical tourism and business tourism.
There is a vast potential for development of
tourism in all parts of the country. Efforts are
being made to promote different types of
tourism for this upcoming industry.
On the map of India show important tourist
places of your State/UT and its connectivity
with other parts of the country by railways/
roadways/airways.
Discuss in the class:
• What type of tourism may be developed in
your state/UT and why?
• Which areas in your state/UT you find more
attractive for development of tourism and why?
• How tourism may be helpful for the economic
development of a region adopting sustainable
development approach?
EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1 . Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which two of the following extreme locations are connected by the eastwest corridor?
(a) Mumbai and Nagpur (c) Mumbai and Kolkata
(b) Silcher and Porbandar (d) Nagpur and Siligudi
(ii) Which mode of transportation reduces trans-shipment losses and delays?
(a) Railways (c) Pipeline
(b) Roadways (d) Waterways
(iii) Which one of the following states is not connected with the H.V.J. pipeline?
(a) Madhya Pradesh (c) Gujarat
(b) Maharashtra (d) Uttar Pradesh
(iv) Which one of the following ports is the deepest land-locked and wellprotected port along the east coast?
(a) Chennai (c) Tuticorin
(b) Paradwip (d) Vishakhapatnam
(v) Which one of the following is the most important modes of transportation
in India?
(a) Pipeline (c) Roadways
(b) Railways (d) Airways
(vi) Which one of the following terms is used to describe trade between two or
more countries?
(a) Internal trade (c) External trade
(b) International trade (d) Local trade
2 . Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) State any three merits of roadways.
(ii) Where and why is rail transport the most convenient means of
transportation?
(iii) What is the significance of the border roads?
(iv) What is meant by trade? What is the difference between international
and local trade?
2015-16
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 93
3 . Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Why are the means of transportation and communication called the lifelines
of a nation and its economy?
(ii) Write a note on the changing nature of the international trade in the last
fifteen years.
QUIZ DRIVE
1 . Northern terminal of the North-south corridor.
2 . The name of National Highway No.2.
3 . The headquarter of the southern railway zone.
4 . The rail gauge with a track width of 1.676 m.
5. The southern terminal of the National Highway No.7.
6. A Riverine Port.
7. Busiest railway junction in Northern India.
ACTIVITY
Start your search vertically, horizontally or diagonally and reach various
destinations across the country!
S H E R S H A H S U R I M A R G
A R T P R N X E L A T A D L A Y
J M M X I P O R A Y M P G H T X
Y C H E N N N A I I K M C A I M
O D C D A L M C S O T P O R C P
A P T R G S K J M J L E A N E R
R A E T A J P O R M W M A S X O
I L S B R O A D G A U G E L O T
A S N L C M E C U K Z M A A J E
L M U G H A L S A R A I B S N A
G O E T V R A Y F T O R E A J M
K Q A I P M N Y R Y A Y H L I N
Q K O L K A T A E U I T W B E A
N I T N K D E M O U R P N P J D
2015-16
