29
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
Vietnam gained formal independence in 1945, before India, but
it took another three decades of fighting before the Republic
of Vietnam was formed. This chapter on Indo-China will
introduce you to one of the important states of the peninsula, namely,
Vietnam. Nationalism in Indo-China developed in a colonial context.
The knitting together of a modern Vietnamese nation that brought
the different communities together was in part the result of
colonisation but, as importantly, it was shaped by the struggle against
colonial domination.
If you see the historical experience of Indo-China in relation to that
of India, you will discover important differences in the way colonial
empires functioned and the anti-imperial movement developed. By
looking at such differences and similarities you can understand the
variety of ways in which nationalism has developed and shaped the
contemporary world.
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
The Nationalist Movement in
Chapter II
Indo-China
Fig.1 – Map of Indo-China.
India and the Contemporary World
30
1 Emerging from the Shadow of China
Indo-China comprises the modern countries of Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia (see Fig. 1). Its early history shows many different groups
of people living in this area under the shadow of the powerful
empire of China. Even when an independent country was established
in what is now northern and central Vietnam, its rulers continued
to maintain the Chinese system of government as well as
Chinese culture.
Vietnam was also linked to what has been called the maritime silk
route that brought in goods, people and ideas. Other networks of
trade connected it to the hinterlands where non-Vietnamese people
such as the Khmer Cambodians lived.
Fig. 2 – The port of Faifo.
This port was founded by Portuguese merchants. It was one of
the ports used by European trading companies much before the
nineteenth century.
1.1 Colonial Domination and Resistance
The colonisation of Vietnam by the French brought the people of
the country into conflict with the colonisers in all areas of life. The
most visible form of French control was military and economic
domination but the French also built a system that tried to reshape
the culture of the Vietnamese. Nationalism in Vietnam emerged
through the efforts of different sections of society to fight against
the French and all they represented.
31
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
Fig. 3 – Francis Garnier, a French officer who led
an attack against the ruling Nguyen dynasty,
being killed by soldiers of the court.
Garnier was part of the French team that explored
the Mekong river. In 1873 he was commissioned
by the French to try and establish a French
colony in Tonkin in the north. Garnier carried out
an attack on Hanoi, the capital of Tonkin, but was
killed in the fight.
French troops landed in Vietnam in 1858
and by the mid-1880s they had established
a firm grip over the northern region.
After the Franco-Chinese war the
French assumed control of Tonkin and
Anaam and, in 1887, French Indo-China
was formed. In the following decades
the French sought to consolidate
their position, and people in Vietnam
began reflecting on the nature of the
loss that Vietnam was suffering. Nationalist
resistance developed out of this reflection.
Fig. 4 – The Mekong river, engraving by the French Exploratory Force, in which Garnier participated.
Exploring and mapping rivers was part of the colonial enterprise everywhere in the world. Colonisers wanted to know
the route of the rivers, their origin, and the terrain they passed through. The rivers could then be properly used for
trade and transport. During these explorations innumerable pictures and maps were produced.
India and the Contemporary World
32
The famous blind poet Ngyuyen Dinh Chieu (1822-88) bemoaned
what was happening to his country:
I would rather face eternal darkness
Than see the faces of traitors.
I would rather see no man
Than encounter one man’s suffering.
I would rather see nothing
Than witness the dismembering of the country
in decline.
1.2 Why the French thought Colonies Necessary
Colonies were considered essential to supply natural resources and
other essential goods. Like other Western nations, France also thought
it was the mission of the ‘advanced’ European countries to bring
the benefits of civilisation to backward peoples.
The French began by building canals and draining lands in the Mekong
delta to increase cultivation. The vast system of irrigation works –
canals and earthworks – built mainly with forced labour, increased
rice production and allowed the export of rice to the international
market. The area under rice cultivation went up from 274,000
hectares in 1873 to 1.1 million hectares in 1900 and 2.2 million in
1930. Vietnam exported two-thirds of its rice production and by
1931 had become the third largest exporter of rice in the world.
This was followed by infrastructure projects to help transport goods
for trade, move military garrisons and control the entire region.
Construction of a trans-Indo-China rail network that would link
the northern and southern parts of Vietnam and China was begun.
This final link with Yunan in China was completed by 1910. The
second line was also built, linking Vietnam to Siam (as Thailand was
then called), via the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh.
By the 1920s, to ensure higher levels of profit for their businesses,
French business interests were pressurising the government in Vietnam
to develop the infrastructure further.
1.3 Should Colonies be Developed?
Everyone agreed that colonies had to serve the interests of the mother
country. But the question was – how? Some like Paul Bernard, an
influential writer and policy-maker, strongly believed that the
Imagine a conversation between a French
coloniser and a Vietnamese labourer in the
canal project. The Frenchman believes he is
bringing civilization to backward people and
the Vietnamese labourer argues against it. In
pairs act out the conversation they may have
had, using evidence from the text.
Activity
33
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
economy of the colonies needed to be developed. He argued that
the purpose of acquiring colonies was to make profits. If the
economy was developed and the standard of living of the people
improved, they would buy more goods. The market would
consequently expand, leading to better profits for French business.
Bernard suggested that there were several barriers to economic
growth in Vietnam: high population levels, low agricultural
productivity and extensive indebtedness amongst the peasants. To
reduce rural poverty and increase agricultural productivity it was
necessary to carry out land reforms as the Japanese had done in the
1890s. However, this could not ensure sufficient employment. As
the experience of Japan showed, industrialisation would be essential
to create more jobs.
The colonial economy in Vietnam was, however, primarily based
on rice cultivation and rubber plantations owned by the French and
a small Vietnamese elite. Rail and port facilities were set up to service
this sector. Indentured Vietnamese labour was widely used in the
rubber plantations. The French, contrary to what Bernard would
have liked, did little to industrialise the economy. In the rural areas
landlordism spread and the standard of living declined.
New words
Indentured labour – A form of labour widely
used in the plantations from the mid-nineteenth
century. Labourers worked on the basis of
contracts that did not specify any rights of
labourers but gave immense power to
employers. Employers could bring criminal
charges against labourers and punish and jail
them for non-fulfilment of contracts.
Fig. 5 – A French weapons merchant, Jean Dupuis, in Vietnam in the late
nineteenth century.
Many like him explored the regions in the hope of making profits from trade. He was
one of those who persuaded the French to try and establish a base in Vietnam.
India and the Contemporary World
34
2 The Dilemma of Colonial Education
French colonisation was not based only on economic exploitation.
It was also driven by the idea of a ‘civilising mission’. Like the British
in India, the French claimed that they were bringing modern civilisation
to the Vietnamese. They took for granted that Europe had developed
the most advanced civilisation. So it became the duty of the
Europeans to introduce these modern ideas to the colony even if
this meant destroying local cultures, religions and traditions, because
these were seen as outdated and prevented modern development.
Education was seen as one way to civilise the ‘native’. But in order
to educate them, the French had to resolve a dilemma. How far
were the Vietnamese to be educated? The French needed an educated
local labour force but they feared that education might create
problems. Once educated, the Vietnamese may begin to question
colonial domination. Moreover, French citizens living in Vietnam
(called colons) began fearing that they might lose their jobs – as
teachers, shopkeepers, policemen – to the educated Vietnamese. So
they opposed policies that would give the Vietnamese full access to
French education.
2.1 Talking Modern
The French were faced with yet another problem in the sphere of
education: the elites in Vietnam were powerfully influenced by
Chinese culture. To consolidate their power, the French had to
counter this Chinese influence. So they systematically dismantled the
traditional educational system and established French schools for
the Vietnamese. But this was not easy. Chinese, the language used by
the elites so far, had to be replaced. But what was to take its place?
Was the language to be Vietnamese or French?
There were two broad opinions on this question. Some policymakers emphasised the need to use the French language as the
medium of instruction. By learning the language, they felt, the
Vietnamese would be introduced to the culture and civilisation of
France. This would help create an ‘Asiatic France solidly tied to
European France’. The educated people in Vietnam would respect
French sentiments and ideals, see the superiority of French culture,
and work for the French. Others were opposed to French being
the only medium of instruction. They suggested that Vietnamese be
taught in lower classes and French in the higher classes. The few
35
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
who learnt French and acquired French culture were to be rewarded
with French citizenship.
However, only the Vietnamese elite – comprising a small fraction
of the population – could enroll in the schools, and only a few
among those admitted ultimately passed the school-leaving
examination. This was largely because of a deliberate policy of failing
students, particularly in the final year, so that they could not qualify
for the better-paid jobs. Usually, as many as two-thirds of the students
failed. In 1925, in a population of 17 million, there were less than
400 who passed the examination.
School textbooks glorified the French and justified colonial rule.
The Vietnamese were represented as primitive and backward, capable
of manual labour but not of intellectual reflection; they could work
in the fields but not rule themselves; they were ‘skilled copyists’ but
not creative. School children were told that only French rule could
ensure peace in Vietnam: ‘Since the establishment of French rule the
Vietnamese peasant no longer lives in constant terror of pirates …
Calm is complete, and the peasant can work with a good heart.’
2.2 Looking Modern
The Tonkin Free School was started in 1907 to provide a Westernstyle education. This education included classes in science, hygiene
and French (these classes were held in the evening and had to be
paid for separately). The school’s approach to what it means to
be ‘modern’ is a good example of the thinking prevalent at that
time. It was not enough to learn science and Western ideas: to be
modern the Vietnamese had to also look modern. The school
encouraged the adoption of Western styles such as having a short
haircut. For the Vietnamese this meant a major break with their own
identity since they traditionally kept long hair. To underline the
importance of a total change there was even a ‘haircutting chant’:
Comb in the left hand
Scissors in the right,
Snip, snip, clip, clip!
Watch out, be careful,
Drop stupid practices,
Dump childish things
Speak openly and frankly
Study Western customs
Imagine you are a student in the Tonkin Free
School in 1910. How would you react to:
¾ what the textbooks say about the
Vietnamese?
¾ what the school tells you about hairstyles?
Activity
Fig. 6 – A local caricature ridiculing the
Vietnamese who has been westernised.
Abandoning his own culture, he has begun
wearing Western clothes and playing tennis.
India and the Contemporary World
36
2.3 Resistance in Schools
Teachers and students did not blindly follow the curriculum.
Sometimes there was open opposition, at other times there was
silent resistance. As the numbers of Vietnamese teachers increased
in the lower classes, it became difficult to control what was actually
taught. While teaching, Vietnamese teachers quietly modified the text
and criticised what was stated.
In 1926 a major protest erupted in the Saigon Native Girls School.
A Vietnamese girl sitting in one of the front seats was asked
to move to the back of the class and allow a local French student
to occupy the front bench. She refused. The principal, also a
colon (French people in the colonies), expelled her. When angry
students protested, they too were expelled, leading to a further
spread of open protests. Seeing the situation getting out of control,
the government forced the school to take the students back.
The principal reluctantly agreed but warned the students, ‘I will crush
all Vietnamese under my feet. Ah! You wish my deportation. Know
well that I will leave only after I am assured Vietnamese no longer
inhabit Cochinchina.’
Elsewhere, students fought against the colonial government’s efforts
to prevent the Vietnamese from qualifying for white-collar jobs.
They were inspired by patriotic feelings and the conviction that it
was the duty of the educated to fight for the benefit of society.
This brought them into conflict with the French as well as the
traditional elite, since both saw their positions threatened. By the
1920s, students were forming various political parties, such as the
Party of Young Annan, and publishing nationalist journals such as
the Annanese Student.
Schools thus became an important place for political and cultural
battles. The French sought to strengthen their rule in Vietnam through
the control of education. They tried to change the values, norms
and perceptions of the people, to make them believe in the superiority
of French civilisation and the inferiority of the Vietnamese.
Vietnamese intellectuals, on the other hand, feared that Vietnam was
losing not just control over its territory but its very identity: its own
culture and customs were being devalued and the people were
developing a master-slave mentality. The battle against French
colonial education became part of the larger battle against colonialism
and for independence.
Some important dates
1802
Nguyen Anh becomes emperor symbolising
the unification of the country under the Nguyen
dynasty.
1867
Cochinchina (the South) becomes a French
colony.
1887
Creation of the Indo-china Union, including
Cochinchina, Annam, Tonkin, Cambodia and
later, Laos.
1930
Ho Chi Minh forms the Vietnamese
Communist Party.
1945
Vietminh start a general popular insurrection.
Bao Dai abdicates. Ho Chi Minh declares
independence in Hanoi (September 23).
1954
The French army is defeated at Dien Bien Phu.
1961
Kennedy decides to increase US military aid to
South Vietnam.
1974
Paris Peace Treaty.
1975 (April 30)
NLF troops enter Saigon.
1976
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam is
proclaimed.
37
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
3 Hygiene, Disease and Everyday Resistance
Education was not the only sphere of everyday life in which such
political battles against colonialism were fought. In many other
institutions we can see the variety of small ways in which the colonised
expressed their anger against the colonisers.
3.1 Plague Strikes Hanoi
Take the case of health and hygiene. When the French set about
creating a modern Vietnam, they decided to rebuild Hanoi.
The latest ideas about architecture and modern engineering skills
were employed to build a new and ‘modern’ city. In 1903,
the modern part of Hanoi was struck by bubonic plague. In
many colonial countries, measures to control the spread of disease
created serious social conflicts. But in Hanoi events took a peculiarly
interesting turn.
The French part of Hanoi was built as a beautiful and clean city with
wide avenues and a well-laid-out sewer system, while the ‘native
Fig. 7 – Modern Hanoi.
Colonial buildings like this one came up in
the French part of Hanoi.
India and the Contemporary World
38
What does the 1903 plague and the measures
to control it tell us about the French colonial
attitude towards questions of health and
hygiene?
Discuss
quarter’ was not provided with any modern facilities. The refuse
from the old city drained straight out into the river or, during heavy
rains or floods, overflowed into the streets. Thus what was installed
to create a hygienic environment in the French city became the cause
of the plague. The large sewers in the modern part of the city, a
symbol of modernity, were an ideal and protected breeding ground
for rats. The sewers also served as a great transport system, allowing
the rats to move around the city without any problem. And rats
began to enter the well-cared-for homes of the French through the
sewage pipes. What was to be done?
3.2 The Rat Hunt
To stem this invasion, a rat hunt was started in 1902. The French
hired Vietnamese workers and paid them for each rat they caught.
Rats began to be caught in thousands: on 30 May, for instance, 20,000
were caught but still there seemed to be no end. For the Vietnamese
the rat hunt seemed to provide an early lesson in the success of
collective bargaining. Those who did the dirty work of entering
sewers found that if they came together they could negotiate a higher
bounty. They also discovered innovative ways to profit from this
situation. The bounty was paid when a tail was given as proof that
a rat had been killed. So the rat-catchers took to just clipping the
tails and releasing the rats, so that the process could be repeated,
over and over again. Some people, in fact, began raising rats to
earn a bounty.
Defeated by the resistance of the weak, the French were forced to
scrap the bounty programme. None of this prevented the bubonic
plague, which swept through the area in 1903 and in subsequent
years. In a way, the rat menace marks the limits of French power
and the contradictions in their ‘civilising mission’. And the actions of
the rat-catchers tell us of the numerous small ways in which
colonialism was fought in everyday life.
39
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
4 Religion and Anti-colonialism
Fig. 8 – The execution of Father Borie, a Catholic
missionary.
Images like this by French artists were publicised
in France to stir up religious fury.
Box 1
Confucius (551-479 BCE), a Chinese thinker,
developed a philosophical system based on good
conduct, practical wisdom and proper social
relationships. People were taught to respect their
parents and submit to elders. They were told
that the relationship between the ruler and the
people was the same as that between children
and parents.
Colonial domination was exercised by control over all areas of private
and public life. The French occupied Vietnam militarily but they also
sought to reshape social and cultural life. While religion played an
important role in strengthening colonial control, it also provided
ways of resistance. Let us consider how this happened.
Vietnam’s religious beliefs were a mixture of Buddhism,
Confucianism and local practices. Christianity, introduced by French
missionaries, was intolerant of this easygoing attitude and viewed
the Vietnamese tendency to revere the supernatural as something to
be corrected.
From the eighteenth century, many religious movements were hostile
to the Western presence. An early movement against French control
and the spread of Christianity was the Scholars Revolt in 1868. This
revolt was led by officials at the imperial court angered by the spread
of Catholicism and French power. They led a general uprising in
India and the Contemporary World
40
New words
Syncretic – Characterised by syncretism; aims
to bring together different beliefs and practices,
seeing their essential unity rather than their
difference
Concentration camp – A prison where people
are detained without due process of law. The
word evokes an image of a place of torture
and brutal treatment
Ngu An and Ha Tien provinces where over a thousand Catholics
were killed. Catholic missionaries had been active in winning converts
since the early seventeenth century, and by the middle of the
eighteenth century had converted some 300,000. The French crushed
the movement but this uprising served to inspire other patriots to
rise up against them.
The elites in Vietnam were educated in Chinese and Confucianism.
But religious beliefs among the peasantry were shaped by a variety
of syncretic traditions that combined Buddhism and local beliefs.
There were many popular religions in Vietnam that were spread by
people who claimed to have seen a vision of God. Some of these
religious movements supported the French, but others inspired
movements against colonial rule.
One such movement was the Hoa Hao. It began in 1939
and gained great popularity in the fertile Mekong delta area. It
drew on religious ideas popular in anti-French uprisings of the
nineteenth century.
The founder of Hoa Hao was a man called Huynh Phu So. He
performed miracles and helped the poor. His criticism against useless
expenditure had a wide appeal. He also opposed the sale of child
brides, gambling and the use of alcohol and opium.
The French tried to suppress the movement inspired by Huynh
Phu So. They declared him mad, called him the Mad Bonze,
and put him in a mental asylum. Interestingly, the doctor who
had to prove him insane became his follower, and finally in 1941,
even the French doctors declared that he was sane. The French
authorities exiled him to Laos and sent many of his followers to
concentration camps.
Movements like this always had a contradictory relationship with
mainstream nationalism. Political parties often drew upon their
support, but were uneasy about their activities. They could neither
control or discipline these groups, nor support their rituals
and practices.
Yet the significance of these movements in arousing anti-imperialist
sentiments should not be underestimated.
41
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
In Japan, Phan Boi Chau and Phan Chu Trinh
spent time together, discussing their visions of
Vietnamese independence, and debating their
differences. This is what Phan Boi Chau later
wrote about their discussions:
‘Thereafter over more than ten days, he and I
debated time and again, and our opinions were
diametrically opposed. That is to say, he wished
to overthrow the monarchy in order to create a
basis for the promotion of popular rights; I, on
the contrary, maintained that first the foreign
enemy should be driven out, and after our
nation’s independence was restored we could
talk about other things. My plan was to make
use of the monarchy, which he opposed
absolutely. His plan was to raise up the people
to abolish the monarchy, with which I absolutely
disagreed. In other words, he and I were pursuing
one and the same goal, but our means were
considerably different.’
Source
Source A
New words
Republic – A form of government based on
popular consent and popular representation.
It is based on the power of the people as
opposed to monarchy
French colonialism was resisted at many levels and in various forms.
But all nationalists had to grapple with one set of questions: What
was it to be Modern? What was it to be Nationalist? In order to be
modern, was it necessary to regard tradition as backward and reject
all earlier ideas and social practices? Was it necessary to consider the
‘West’ as the symbol of development and civilisation, and try and
copy the West?
Different answers were offered to such questions. Some intellectuals
felt that Vietnamese traditions had to be strengthened to resist
the domination of the West, while others felt that Vietnam had
to learn from the West even while opposing foreign domination.
These differing visions led to complex debates, which could not be
easily resolved.
In the late nineteenth century, resistance to French domination was
very often led by Confucian scholar-activists, who saw their world
crumbling. Educated in the Confucian tradition, Phan Boi Chau
(1867-1940) was one such nationalist. He became a major figure in
the anti-colonial resistance from the time he formed the Revolutionary
Society (Duy Tan Hoi) in 1903, with Prince Cuong De as the head.
Phan Boi Chau met the Chinese reformer Liang Qichao (1873-1929)
in Yokohama in 1905. Phan’s most influential book, The History of
the Loss of Vietnam was written under the strong influence and advice
of Qichao. It became a widely read bestseller in Vietnam and China
and was even made into a play. The book focuses on two connected
themes: the loss of sovereignty and the severing of ties with China –
ties that bound the elites of the two countries within a shared culture.
It is this double loss that Phan laments, a lament that was typical of
reformers from within the traditional elite.
Other nationalists strongly differed with Phan Boi Chau. One such
was Phan Chu Trinh (1871-1926). He was intensely hostile to the
monarchy and opposed to the idea of resisting the French with the
help of the court. His desire was to establish a democratic republic.
Profoundly influenced by the democratic ideals of the West, he did
not want a wholesale rejection of Western civilisation. He accepted
the French revolutionary ideal of liberty but charged the French
for not abiding by the ideal. He demanded that the French set up
legal and educational institutions, and develop agriculture
and industries.
5 The Vision of Modernisation
What ideas did Phan Boi Chau and Phan
Chu Trinh share in common? What did they
differ on?
Discuss
India and the Contemporary World
42
5.1 Other Ways of Becoming Modern: Japan and China
Early Vietnamese nationalists had a close relationship with Japan
and China. They provided models for those looking to change, a
refuge for those who were escaping French police, and a location
where a wider Asian network of revolutionaries could be established.
In the first decade of the twentieth century a ‘go east movement’
became popular. In 1907-08 some 300 Vietnamese students went
to Japan to acquire modern education. For many of them the primary
objective was to drive out the French from Vietnam, overthrow
the puppet emperor and re-establish the Nguyen dynasty that had
been deposed by the French. These nationalists looked for foreign
arms and help. They appealed to the Japanese as fellow Asians.
Japan had modernised itself and had resisted colonisation by the
West. Besides, its victory over Russia in 1907 proved its military
capabilities. Vietnamese students established a branch of the
Restoration Society in Tokyo but after 1908, the Japanese Ministry
of Interior clamped down on them. Many, including Phan Boi Chau,
were deported and forced to seek exile in China and Thailand.
Developments in China also inspired
Vietnamese nationalists. In 1911, the long
established monarchy in China was
overthrown by a popular movement under
Sun Yat-sen, and a Republic was set up.
Inspired by these developments, Vietnamese
students organised the Association for the
Restoration of Vietnam (Viet-Nam
Quan Phuc Hoi). Now the nature of the
anti-French independence movement
changed. The objective was no longer to
set up a constitutional monarchy but a
democratic republic.
Soon, however, the anti-imperialist movement
in Vietnam came under a new type
of leadership.
Fig. 9 – Cartoon of Vietnamese nationalists chasing away imperialists.
In all such nationalist representations of struggle the nationalists
appear heroic, marching ahead, while the imperial forces flee.
43
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
6 The Communist Movement and Vietnamese Nationalism
The Great Depression of the 1930s had a profound impact on
Vietnam. The prices of rubber and rice fell, leading to rising rural
debts, unemployment and rural uprisings, such as in the provinces
of Nghe An and Ha Tinh. These provinces were among the poorest,
had an old radical tradition, and have been called the ‘electrical fuses’
of Vietnam – when the system was under pressure they were the
first to blow. The French put these uprisings down with great severity,
even using planes to bomb demonstrators.
In February 1930, Ho Chi Minh brought together competing
nationalist groups to establish the Vietnamese Communist (Vietnam
Cong San Dang) Party, later renamed the Indo-Chinese Communist
Party. He was inspired by the militant demonstrations of the European
communist parties.
In 1940 Japan occupied Vietnam, as part of its imperial drive to
control Southeast Asia. So nationalists now had to fight against the
Japanese as well as the French. The League for the Independence of
Vietnam (Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh), which came to be known
as the Vietminh, fought the Japanese occupation and recaptured
Hanoi in September 1945. The Democratic Republic of Vietnam
was formed and Ho Chi Minh became Chairman.
6.1 The New Republic of Vietnam
The new republic faced a number of challenges. The French tried to
regain control by using the emperor, Bao Dai, as their puppet. Faced
with the French offensive, the Vietminh were forced to retreat to
the hills. After eight years of fighting, the French were defeated in
1954 at Dien Bien Phu.
The Supreme French Commander of the French armies, General
Henry Navarre had declared confidently in 1953 that they would
soon be victorious. But on 7 May 1954, the Vietminh annihilated
and captured more than 16,000 soldiers of the French Expeditionary
Corps. The entire commanding staff, including a general, 16 colonels
and 1,749 officers, were taken prisoner.
In the peace negotiations in Geneva that followed the French defeat,
the Vietnamese were persuaded to accept the division of the country.
North and south were split: Ho Chi Minh and the communists took
Declaration of independence
The declaration of the new republic began by
reaffirming the principles of the declaration of
independence of the United States in 1771 and
of the French Revolution in 1791 but added that
the French imperialists do not follow these
principles for they
‘have violated our fatherland and oppressed our
fellow citizens. They have acted contrary to the
ideals of humanity and justice.
‘In the field of politics, they have deprived
us of all liberties. They have imposed upon us
inhuman laws … They have built more prisons
than schools. They have mercilessly slain our
patriots; they have drowned our uprisings in
rivers of blood.
‘They have fettered public opinion; they have
practiced obscurantism against our people …
‘For these reasons, we members of the
Provisional Government, representing the entire
population of Vietnam, declare that we shall
henceforth have no connection with imperialist
France; that we abolish all the privileges which
the French have arrogated to themselves on
our territory …
‘We solemnly proclaim to the entire world:
Vietnam has the right to be free and
independent, and in fact has become free and
independent.’
Source
Source B
New words
Obscurantist – Person or ideas that mislead
India and the Contemporary World
44
power in the north while Bao Dai’s regime was put in power
in the south.
This division set in motion a series of events that turned
Vietnam into a battlefield bringing death and destruction to
its people as well as the environment. The Bao Dai regime
was soon overthrown by a coup led by Ngo Dinh Diem.
Diem built a repressive and authoritarian government. Anyone
who opposed him was called a communist and was jailed
and killed. Diem retained Ordinance 10, a French law that
permitted Christianity but outlawed Buddhism. His dictatorial
rule came to be opposed by a broad opposition united under
the banner of the National Liberation Front (NLF).
With the help of the Ho Chi Minh government in the north,
the NLF fought for the unification of the country. The US
Fig. 10 – The French Commander in Indo-China,
General Henri Navarre (right).
Navarre wanted to attack the Vietminh even in their
remote bases. As a consequence the French opened
many fronts of attack and scattered their forces.
Navarre’s plans backfired in the North Eastern Valley
of Dien Bien Phu.
Box 2
At Dien Bien Phu the French were outwitted by the Vietminh forces led by General Vo Nguyen Giap. The French
Commander, Navarre, had not thought of all the problems he would face in the battle. The valley where French garrisons
were located was flooded in the monsoon and the area was covered with bushes, making it difficult to move troops and
tanks, or trace the Vietminh anti-aircraft guns hidden in the jungle.
From their base in the hills, the Vietminh surrounded the French garrisons in the valley below, digging trenches and tunnels
to move without being detected. Supplies and reinforcements could not reach the besieged French garrison, the wounded
French soldiers could not be moved, and the French airstrip became unusable because of continuous artillery fire.
Dien Bien Phu became a very important symbol of struggle. It strengthened Vietminh conviction in their capacity to fight
powerful imperial forces through determination and proper strategy. Stories of the battle were retold in villages and cities
to inspire people.
Fig. 11 – Supplies being taken
to Dien Bien Phu.
Vietminh forces used bicycles
and porters to transport
supplies. They went through
jungles and hidden tracks to
escape enemy attacks.
45
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
Box 3
Ho Chi Minh (1890-1969)
Little is known about his early life mostly because Minh chose to downplay his personal background and identify himself
with the cause of Vietnam. Probably born as Nguyen Van Thanh in Central Vietnam, he studied at French schools that
produced leaders such as Ngo Dinh Diem, Vo Nguyen Giap and Pham Van Dong. He briefly taught in 1910, and in 1911,
learnt baking and took a job on a French liner on the Saigon-Marseilles run. Minh became an active member of the
Commintern, meeting Lenin and other leaders. In May 1941, after 30 years abroad in Europe, Thailand and China, Minh
finally returned to Vietnam. In 1943 he took the name Ho Chi Minh (He Who Enlightens). He became president of the
Vietnam Democratic Republic. Ho Chi Minh died on 3 September 1969. He led the party successfully for over 40 years,
struggling to preserve Vietnamese autonomy.
watched this alliance with fear. Worried about communists gaining
power, it decided to intervene decisively, sending in troops
and arms.
6.2 The Entry of the US into the War
US entry into the war marked a new phase that proved costly to the
Vietnamese as well as to the Americans. From 1965 to 1972, over
3,403,100 US services personnel served in Vietnam (7,484 were
women). Even though the US had advanced technology and good
Fig. 12 – American soldiers searching rice fields for Vietcongs.
India and the Contemporary World
46
Box 4
Agent Orange: The Deadly Poison
Agent Orange is a defoliant, a plant killer, so called
because it was stored in drums marked with an
orange band. Between 1961 and 1971, some
11 million gallons of this chemical was sprayed
from cargo planes by US forces. Their plan was
to destroy forests and fields, so that it would be
easier to kill if there was no jungle cover for
people to hide in. Over 14 per cent of the
country’s farmland was affected by this poison.
Its effect has been staggering, continuing to
affect people till today. Dioxin, an element of
Agent Orange, is known to cause cancer and
brain damage in children, and, according to a
study, is also the cause of the high incidence of
deformities found in the sprayed areas.
The tonnage of bombs, including chemical arms,
used during the US intervention (mostly against
civilian targets) in Vietnam exceeds that used
throughout the Second World War.
medical supplies, casualties were high. About 47,244 died in battle
and 303,704 were wounded. (Of those wounded, 23,014 were listed
by the Veterans Administration to be 100 per cent disabled.)
This phase of struggle with the US was brutal. Thousands of US
troops arrived equipped with heavy weapons and tanks and backed
by the most powerful bombers of the time – B52s. The wide spread
attacks and use of chemical weapons – Napalm, Agent Orange, and
phosphorous bombs – destroyed many villages and decimated jungles.
Civilians died in large numbers.
The effect of the war was felt within the US as well. Many were
critical of the government for getting involved in a war that they saw
as indefensible. When the youth were drafted for the war, the anger
spread. Compulsory service in the armed forces, however, could be
waived for university graduates. This meant that many of those sent
to fight did not belong to the privileged elite but were minorities and
children of working-class families.
The US media and films played a major role in both supporting as
well as criticising the war. Hollywood made films in support of the
war, such as John Wayne’s Green Berets (1968). This has
been cited by many as an example of an unthinking
propaganda film that was responsible for motivating
many young men to die in the war. Other films were
more critical as they tried to understand the reasons
for this war. Francis Ford Coppola’s Apocalypse Now
(1979) reflected the moral confusion that the war had
caused in the US.
The war grew out of a fear among US policy-planners
that the victory of the Ho Chi Minh government would
start a domino effect – communist governments would
be established in other countries in the area. They
underestimated the power of nationalism to move
people to action, inspire them to sacrifice their home and family, live
under horrific conditions, and fight for independence. They
underestimated the power of a small country to fight the most
technologically advanced country in the world.
Fig. 13 – In December 1972 Hanoi was bombed.
New words
Napalm – An organic compound used to thicken gasoline for firebombs. The mixture burns slowly and when it
comes in contact with surfaces like the human body, it sticks and continues to burn. Developed in the US, it was
used in the Second World War. Despite an international outcry, it was used in Vietnam.
47
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
6.3 The Ho Chi Minh Trail
The story of the Ho Chi Minh trail is one way of understanding the
nature of the war that the Vietnamese fought against the US. It
symbolises how the Vietnamese used their limited resources to great
advantage. The trail, an immense network of footpaths and roads,
was used to transport men and materials from the north to the south.
The trail was improved from the late 1950s, and from 1967 about
20,000 North Vietnamese troops came south each month on this trail.
The trail had support bases and hospitals along the way. In some parts
supplies were transported in trucks, but mostly they were carried by
porters, who were mainly women. These porters carried about 25
kilos on their backs, or about 70 kilos on their bicycles.
Most of the trail was outside Vietnam in neighbouring Laos
and Cambodia with branch lines extending into South Vietnam. The
US regularly bombed this trail trying to disrupt supplies, but efforts
to destroy this important supply line by intensive bombing failed
because they were rebuilt very quickly.
Fig. 15 – Rebuilding damaged roads.
Roads damaged by bombs were quickly rebuilt.
Fig.14 – The Ho Chi Minh trail.
Notice how the trail moved through Laos and
Cambodia.
NORTH
VIETNAM
Khesanh
Hue
Danang
Quangngai
Quinhon
Dakto
Pheiku
Banmethuot
Tayninh
Saigon
LAOS
THAILAND
CAMBODIA
SOUTH
VIETNAM
South China Sea
Tonle Sap Mekong
Mekong
Ho
Chi
Minh Trail
India and the Contemporary World
48
Fig.16 – On the Ho Chi Minh trail.
Letters of Mr Do Sam
Do Sam was a colonel in the North Vietnamese artillery regiment. He was part of the Tet Offensive started in 1968, to
unify North and South Vietnam and win the battle against US. These are extracts from his letters written to his wife from
the scene of battle. They show how, in the nationalist imagination, personal love mingles with love for the country and the
desire for freedom. Sacrifice appears necessary for happiness.
Letter dated 6/1968
‘You ask me what “you miss most when you think of me?” I miss the environment of our wedding ... I miss the small cozy
room with lots of memories. I miss …
‘Right after our wedding I had to again leave to fight in order to protect the coastal areas of our country. What a short
time we had before I had to station permanently in the South. The more I think, the more I feel for you; therefore I
would have to be more determined to protect the country in order to bring happiness for millions of couples like us …
‘Last night the car kept heading south. This morning I am writing to you sitting on a stone, surrounded by the sound of
streams and the rustle of trees, as if they were celebrating our happiness. Looking forward to the day when we can return
victoriously. Then we could live in greater happiness, couldn’t we? Wish you good health and miss me always …’
Letter dated 6/1968
‘Though you are always in my mind I have to focus on my work to contribute to the victory of the ongoing struggle of
our nation …
‘I have promised myself that only when the South is liberated and peace and happiness return to the people, only then
could I be free to focus on building our own happiness, only then I could be satisfied with our family life …’
- Hung, Dang Vuong, (Letters Written during the War in Vietnam), publication of Hoi nha
van (Writers’ Association), 2005. Translation by Nguen Quoc Anh. Source
Source C
"Những lá thư thời chiến Việt Nam
49
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
7 The Nation and Its Heroes
Another way of looking at social movements is to see how they
affect different groups in society. Let us see how the roles of women
were specified in the anti-imperialist movement in Vietnam, and
what that tells us about nationalist ideology.
7.1 Women as Rebels
Women in Vietnam traditionally enjoyed greater equality than in China,
particularly among the lower classes, but they had only limited
freedom to determine their future and played no role in public life.
As the nationalist movement grew, the status of women came to be
questioned and a new image of womanhood emerged. Writers and
political thinkers began idealising women who rebelled against social
norms. In the 1930s, a famous novel by Nhat Linh caused a scandal
because it showed a woman leaving a forced marriage and marrying
someone of her choice, someone who was involved in nationalist
politics. This rebellion against social conventions marked the arrival
of the new woman in Vietnamese society.
7.2 Heroes of Past Times
Rebel women of the past were similarly celebrated. In 1913, the
nationalist Phan Boi Chau wrote a play based on the lives of the
Trung sisters who had fought against Chinese domination in
39-43 CE. In this play he depicted these sisters as patriots fighting to
save the Vietnamese nation from the Chinese. The actual reasons for
the revolt are a matter of debate among scholars, but after Phan’s
play the Trung sisters came to be idealised and glorified. They were
depicted in paintings, plays and novels as representing the indomitable
will and the intense patriotism of the Vietnamese. We are told that
they gathered a force of over 30,000, resisted the Chinese for two
years, and when ultimately defeated, they committed suicide, instead
of surrendering to the enemy.
Other women rebels of the past were part of the popular nationalist
lore. One of the most venerated was Trieu Au who lived in the
third century CE. Orphaned in childhood, she lived with her brother.
On growing up she left home, went into the jungles, organised a
large army and resisted Chinese rule. Finally, when her army was
Fig. 17 – Image of Trieu Au worshipped as a
sacred figure.
Rebels who resisted Chinese rule continue to be
celebrated.
India and the Contemporary World
50
crushed, she drowned herself. She became a sacred figure, not just a
martyr who fought for the honour of the country. Nationalists
popularised her image to inspire people to action.
7.3 Women as Warriors
In the 1960s, photographs in magazines and journals showed women
as brave fighters. There were pictures of women militia shooting
down planes. They were portrayed as young, brave and dedicated.
Stories were written to show how happy they felt when they joined
the army and could carry a rifle. Some stories spoke of their incredible
bravery in single-handedly killing the enemy – Nguyen Thi Xuan,
for instance, was reputed to have shot down a jet with just
twenty bullets.
Women were represented not only as warriors but also as workers:
they were shown with a rifle in one hand and a hammer in the other.
Whether young or old, women began to be depicted as selflessly
working and fighting to save the country. As casualties in the war
increased in the 1960s, women were urged to join the struggle in
larger numbers.
Many women responded and joined the resistance movement. They
helped in nursing the wounded, constructing underground rooms
and tunnels and fighting the enemy. Along the Ho Chi Minh trail
young volunteers kept open 2,195 km of strategic roads and guarded
2,500 key points. They built six airstrips, neutralised tens of thousands
of bombs, transported tens of thousands of kilograms of cargo,
weapons and food and shot down fifteen planes. Between 1965
and 1975, of the 17,000 youth who worked on the trail, 70 to 80
per cent were women. One military historian argues that there were
1.5 million women in the regular army, the militia, the local forces
and professional teams.
7.4 Women in Times of Peace
By the 1970s, as peace talks began to get under way and the end of
the war seemed near, women were no longer represented as warriors.
Now the image of women as workers begins to predominate. They
are shown working in agricultural cooperatives, factories and
production units, rather than as fighters.
Fig. 18 – With a gun in one hand.
Stories about women showed them eager to
join the army. A common description was:
‘A rosy-cheeked woman, here I am fighting
side by side with you men. The prison is
my school, the sword is my child, the gun
is my husband.’
Fig. 19 – Vietnamese women doctors
nursing the wounded.
51
The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China
The prolongation of the war created strong reactions even within
the US. It was clear that the US had failed to achieve its objectives:
the Vietnamese resistance had not been crushed; the support of the
Vietnamese people for US action had not been won. In the
meantime, thousands of young US soldiers had lost their lives, and
countless Vietnamese civilians had been killed. This was a war that
has been called the first television war. Battle scenes were shown
on the daily news programmes. Many became disillusioned with
what the US was doing and writers such as Mary McCarthy, and
actors like Jane Fonda even visited North Vietnam and praised their
heroic defence of the country. The scholar Noam Chomsky called
the war ‘the greatest threat to peace, to national self-determination,
and to international cooperation’.
The widespread questioning of government policy strengthened
moves to negotiate an end to the war. A peace settlement was signed
in Paris in January 1974. This ended conflict with the US but fighting
between the Saigon regime and the NLF continued. The NLF
occupied the presidential palace in Saigon on 30 April 1975 and
unified Vietnam.
Fig. 20 – North Vietnamese prisoners in South
Vietnam being released after the accord .
8 The End of the War
Fig. 21 – Vietcong soldiers pose triumphantly atop a tank after Saigon is liberated.
What does this image tell us about the nature of Vietnamese nationalism?
India and the Contemporary World
52
Discuss
Project
1. With reference to what you have read in this chapter, discuss the influence of
China on Vietnam’s culture and life.
2. What was the role of religious groups in the development of anti-colonial feeling in Vietnam?
3. Explain the causes of the US involvement in the war in Vietnam. What effect did this
involvement have on life within the US itself?
4. Write an evaluation of the Vietnamese war against the US from the point of
a) a porter on the Ho Chi Minh trail.
b) a woman soldier.
5. What was the role of women in the anti-imperial struggle in Vietnam? Compare this
with the role of women in the nationalist struggle in India.
Find out about the anti-imperialist movement in any one country in South America. Imagine
that a freedom fighter from this country meets a Vietminh soldier; they become friends and
talk about their experiences of the freedom struggles in their countries. Write about the
conversation they might have.
Discuss
Write in brief
1. Write a note on:
a) What was meant by the ‘civilising mission’ of the colonisers
b) Huynh Phu So
2. Explain the following:
a) Only one-third of the students in Vietnam would pass the school-leaving
examinations.
b) The French began building canals and draining lands in the Mekong delta.
c) The government made the Saigon Native Girls School take back the
students it had expelled.
d) Rats were most common in the modern, newly built areas of Hanoi.
3. Describe the ideas behind the Tonkin Free School. To what extent was it a
typical example of colonial ideas in Vietnam?
4. What was Phan Chu Trinh’s objective for Vietnam? How were his ideas different
from those of Phan Boi Chau?
Write in brief
Project
