127
Work, Life and Leisure
In 1880, Durgacharan Ray wrote a novel, Debganer Martye Aagaman (The Gods Visit Earth), in which Brahma, the Creator in Hindu
mythology, took a train to Calcutta with some other gods. As Varuna,
the Rain God, conducted them around the capital of British India,
the gods were wonderstruck by the big, modern city – the train
itself, the large ships on the river Ganges, factories belching smoke,
bridges and monuments and a dazzling array of shops selling a
wide range of commodities. The gods were so impressed by the
marvels of the teeming metropolis that they decided to build a
Museum and a High Court in Heaven!
The city of Calcutta in the nineteenth century was brimming with
opportunities – for trade and commerce, education and jobs. But
the gods were disturbed by another aspect of city life – its cheats
and thieves, its grinding poverty, and the poor quality of housing
for many. Brahma himself got tricked into buying a pair of cheap
glasses and when he tried to buy a pair of shoes, he was greatly
confused by the shopkeepers who accused one another of being
swindlers. The gods were also perturbed at the confusion of caste,
religious and gender identities in the city. All social distinctions that
appeared to be natural and normal seemed to be breaking down.
Like Durgacharan Ray, many others in nineteenth-century India
were both amazed and confused by what they saw in the cities.
The city seemed to offer a series of contrasting images and
experiences – wealth and poverty, splendour and dirt, opportunities
and disappointments.
Were cities always like the one described above? Though urbanisation
has a long history, the modern city worldwide has developed only
over the last 200 years. Three historical processes have shaped
modern cities in decisive ways: the rise of industrial capitalism, the
establishment of colonial rule over large parts of the world, and the
development of democratic ideals. This chapter will trace some of
the processes of this urbanisation. It will explore how the modern
city emerges, and what happens within the city.
Work, Life and Leisure
Work, Life and Leisure
Chapter VI
Cities in the Contemporary World
India and the Contemporary World
128
1 Characteristics of the City
To begin with, how do we distinguish between cities on the one
hand and towns and villages on the other? Towns and cities
that first appeared along river valleys, such as Ur, Nippur
and Mohenjodaro, were larger in scale than other human
settlements. Ancient cities could develop only when an increase
in food supplies made it possible to support a wide range of
non-food producers. Cites were often the centres of political power,
administrative network, trade and industry, religious institutions,
and intellectual activity, and supported various social groups such as
artisans, merchants and priests.
Cities themselves can vary greatly in size and complexity. They can
be densely settled modern-day metropolises, which combine
political and economic functions for an entire region, and support
very large populations. Or they can be smaller urban centres with
limited functions.
This chapter will discuss the history of urbanisation in the modern
world. We will look in some detail at two modern cities, as examples
of metropolitan development. The first is London, the largest city
in the world, and an imperial centre in the nineteenth century, and
the second is Bombay, one of the most important modern cities in
the Indian subcontinent.
1.1 Industrialisation and the Rise of the Modern City
in England
Industrialisation changed the form of urbanisation in the modern
period. However, even as late as the 1850s, many decades after the
beginning of the industrial revolution, most Western countries were
largely rural. The early industrial cities of Britain such as Leeds and
Manchester attracted large numbers of migrants to the textile mills
set up in the late eighteenth century. In 1851, more than three-quarters
of the adults living in Manchester were migrants from rural areas.
Now let us look at London. By 1750, one out of every nine people
of England and Wales lived in London. It was a colossal city with a
population of about 675,000. Over the nineteenth century, London
continued to expand. Its population multiplied fourfold in the
70 years between 1810 and 1880, increasing from 1 million to about
4 million.
Can you think of appropriate examples from
Indian history for each of these categories: a
religious centre, a market town, a regional
capital, a metropolis? Find out about the history
of any one of them.
Activity
New words
Metropolis – A large, densely populated city
of a country or state, often the capital of the
region
Urbanisation – Development of a city or town
129
Work, Life and Leisure
Fig. 1 – The growth of
London, a map showing its
population in four different
eras.
New words
Philanthropist – Someone who works for
social upliftment and charity, donating time
and money for the purpose
The city of London was a powerful magnet for migrant populations,
even though it did not have large factories. ‘Nineteenth century
London,’ says the historian Gareth Stedman Jones, ‘was a city of
clerks and shopkeepers, of small masters and skilled artisans, of a
growing number of semi skilled and sweated outworkers, of
soldiers and servants, of casual labourers, street sellers, and beggars.’
Apart from the London dockyards, five major types of industries
employed large numbers: clothing and footwear, wood and furniture,
metals and engineering, printing and stationery, and precision products
such as surgical instruments, watches, and objects of precious metal.
During the First World War (1914-18) London began manufacturing
motor cars and electrical goods, and the number of large factories
increased until they accounted for nearly one-third of all jobs in
the city.
1.2 Marginal Groups
As London grew, crime flourished. We are told that 20,000 criminals
were living in London in the 1870s. We know a great deal about
criminal activities in this period, for crime became an object of
widespread concern. The police were worried about law and order,
philanthropists were anxious about public morality, and industrialists
wanted a hard-working and orderly labour force. So the population
of criminals was counted, their activities were watched, and their
ways of life were investigated.
In the mid-nineteenth century, Henry Mayhew wrote several volumes
on the London labour, and compiled long lists of those who made
a living from crime. Many of whom he listed as ‘criminals’ were in
fact poor people who lived by stealing lead from roofs, food from
shops, lumps of coal, and clothes drying on hedges. There were
others who were more skilled at their trade, expert at their jobs.
They were the cheats and tricksters, pickpockets and petty thieves
crowding the streets of London. In an attempt to discipline the
population, the authorities imposed high penalties for crime and
offered work to those who were considered the ‘deserving poor’.
Factories employed large numbers of women in the lateeighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries. With technological developments,
women gradually lost their industrial jobs, and were forced to work
within households. The 1861 census recorded a quarter of a million
domestic servants in London, of whom the vast majority were
1784
1862
1914
1980
River Thames
Population
India and the Contemporary World
130
Fig. 2 – A Stranger’s Home, The Illustrated London News,1870.
Night Refuges and Strangers’ Homes were opened in winter by charitable societies and local authorities
in many towns. The poor flocked to these places in the hope of food, warmth and shelter.
Imagine that you are a newspaper reporter
writing a piece on the changes you see in
London in 1811. What problems are you likely
to write about? Who would have gained from
the changes?
Activity women, many of them recent migrants. A large number of women
used their homes to increase family income by taking in lodgers or
through such activities as tailoring, washing or matchbox making.
However, there was a change once again in the twentieth century. As
women got employment in wartime industries and offices, they
withdrew from domestic service.
Large number of children were pushed into low-paid work, often
by their parents. Andrew Mearns, a clergyman who wrote The Bitter
Cry of Outcast London in the 1880s, showed why crime was more
profitable than labouring in small underpaid factories: ‘A child seven
years old is easily known to make 10 shillings 6 pence a week from
thieving … Before he can gain as much as the young thief [a boy]
must make 56 gross of matchboxes a week, or 1,296 a day.’ It was
only after the passage of the Compulsory Elementary Education
Act in 1870, and the factory acts beginning from 1902, that children
were kept out of industrial work.
1.3 Housing
Older cities like London changed dramatically when people began
pouring in after the Industrial Revolution. Factory or workshop
131
Work, Life and Leisure
New words
Tenement – Run-down and often
overcrowded apartment house, especially in
a poor section of a large city
Fig. 3 – Rat-trap seller, cartoon by Rowlandson,
1799.
Rowlandson recorded the types of trades in
London that were beginning to disappear with
the development of industrial capitalism.
In many cities of India today, there are moves
to clear away the slums where poor people
live. Discuss whether or not it is the
responsibility of the government to make
arrangements for houses for these people.
Activity
Fig. 4 – A London slum in 1889.
What are the different uses of street space that
are visible in this picture? What would have
changed in the conditions of working class
housing in the twentieth century?
owners did not house the migrant workers. Instead, individual
landowners put up cheap, and usually unsafe, tenements for the
new arrivals.
Although poverty was not unknown in the countryside, it was more
concentrated and starkly visible in the city. In 1887, Charles Booth,
a Liverpool shipowner, conducted the first social survey of lowskilled London workers in the East End of London. He found
that as many as 1 million Londoners (about one-fifth of the
population of London at the time) were very poor and were expected
to live only up to an average age of 29 (compared to the average
life expectancy of 55 among the gentry and the middle class).
These people were more than likely to die in a ‘workhouse, hospital
or lunatic asylum’. London, he concluded ‘needed the rebuilding of
at least 400,000 rooms to house its poorest citizens’.
For a while the better-off city dwellers continued to demand that
slums simply be cleared away. But gradually a larger and larger
number of people began to recognise the need for housing
for the poor. What were the reasons for this increasing concern?
First, the vast mass of one-room houses occupied by the poor were
seen as a serious threat to public health: they were overcrowded,
badly ventilated, and lacked sanitation. Second, there were worries
about fire hazards created by poor housing. Third, there was a
widespread fear of social disorder, especially after the Russian
Revolution in 1917. Workers’ mass housing schemes were planned
to prevent the London poor from turning rebellious.
India and the Contemporary World
132
Imagine you are investigating the conditions in which the London
poor lived. Write a note discussing all the dangers to public
health which were created by these conditions.
Activity
Fig. 5 – For the poor, the street often was the only place for rest, leisure and fun. The
Illustrated London News, 1856.
Over the nineteenth century, the elites became increasingly worried about drunkenness
and squalor on the streets. Gradually, a temperance movement developed to fight
against the evils of drinking.
‘The children too must not be forgotten in the
open spaces. The kinderbank, or low seat to
suit their short legs, should always be provided
and where possible spaces of turf be supplied
with swings or seesaws, with ponds for sailing
boats, and with sand pits where these can be
kept sufficiently clean.’
Source
Source A
New words
Temperance movement – A largely middleclass-led social reform movement which
emerged in Britain and America from the
nineteenth century onwards. It identified
alcoholism as the cause of the ruin of families
and society, and aimed at reducing the
consumption of alcoholic drinks particularly
amongst the working classes.
1.4 Cleaning London
A variety of steps were taken to clean up London. Attempts were
made to decongest localities, green the open spaces, reduce pollution
and landscape the city. Large blocks of apartments were built, akin
to those in Berlin and New York – cities which had similar housing
problems. Rent control was introduced in Britain during the First
World War to ease the impact of a severe housing shortage.
The congestion in the nineteenth-century industrial city also led to a
yearning for clean country air. Many wealthy residents of London
were able to afford a holiday home in the countryside. Demands
were made for new ‘lungs’ for the city, and some attempts
133
Work, Life and Leisure
Fig. 6 – New Earswick, a garden
suburb.
Notice the enclosed green space to
produce a new community life.
were made to bridge the difference between city and countryside
through such ideas as the Green Belt around London.
Architect and planner Ebenezer Howard developed the principle
of the Garden City, a pleasant space full of plants and trees, where
people would both live and work. He believed this would also
produce better-quality citizens. Following Howard’s ideas Raymond
Unwin and Barry Parker designed the garden city of New Earswick.
There were common garden spaces, beautiful views, and
great attention to detail. In the end, only well-off workers could
afford these houses.
Between the two World Wars (1919-39) the responsibility for housing
the working classes was accepted by the British state, and a million
houses, most of them single-family cottages, were built by local
authorities. Meanwhile, the city had extended beyond the range where
people could walk to work, and the development of suburbs made
new forms of mass transport absolutely necessary.
1.5 Transport in the City
How could people be persuaded to leave the city and live in garden
suburbs unless there were some means of travelling to the city
for work? The London underground railway partially solved
the housing crisis by carrying large masses of people to and from
the city.
The very first section of the Underground in the world
opened on 10 January 1863 between Paddington and
Farrington Street in London. On that day 10,000
passengers were carried, with trains running every ten
minutes. By 1880 the expanded train service
was carrying 40 million passengers a year. At first
people were afraid to travel underground. This is what
one newspaper reader warned:
The compartment in which I sat was filled with
passengers who were smoking pipes. The
atmosphere was a mixture of sulphur, coal dust
and foul fumes from the gas lamps above, so
that by the time we reached Moorgate, I was
near dead of asphyxiation and heat. I should
think these underground railways must soon be
discontinued for they are a menace to health.
Fig. 7 – Railway lines being laid in London, Illustrated Times,
1868.
India and the Contemporary World
134
New words
Asphyxiation – Suffocation due to lack of
oxygen supply
Fig. 8 – London Underground advertisement for
Golders Green, around 1900.
You can see the Underground advertisement
persuading people to move to green, uncrowded
and picturesque suburbs.
Fig. 9 – Cows on the streets of London, The Graphic, 1877.
Clearing streets was part of the project of building a modern city.
In the nineteenth century, cows regularly blocked traffic on
London roads.
Many felt that the ‘iron monsters’ added to the mess and unhealthiness
of the city. Charles Dickens wrote in Dombey and Son (1848) about
the massive destruction in the process of construction:
Houses were knocked down; streets broken through and stopped;
deep pits and trenches dug in the ground; enormous heaps of
earth and clay thrown up; … there were a hundred thousand
shapes and substances of incompleteness, wildly mingled out their
places, upside down, burrowing in the earth . . .
To make approximately two miles of railway, 900 houses had
to be destroyed. Thus the London tube railway led to a
massive displacement of the London poor, especially between the
two World Wars.
Yet the Underground eventually became a huge success. By the
twentieth century, most large metropolises such as New York, Tokyo
and Chicago could not do without their well-functioning transit
systems. As a result, the population in the city became more dispersed.
Better-planned suburbs and a good railway network enabled large
numbers to live outside central London and travel to work.
These new conveniences wore down social distinctions and also
created new ones. How did these changes affect domestic and public
life? Did they have the same significance for all social groups?
135
Work, Life and Leisure
2 Social Change in the City
In the eighteenth century, the family had been a unit of production
and consumption as well as of political decision-making. The function
and the shape of the family were completely transformed by life in
the industrial city.
Ties between members of households loosened, and among the
working class the institution of marriage tended to break down.
Women of the upper and middle classes in Britain, on the other
hand, faced increasingly higher levels of isolation, although their lives
were made easier by domestic maids who cooked, cleaned and cared
for young children on low wages.
Women who worked for wages had some control over their lives,
particularly among the lower social classes. However, many social
reformers felt that the family as an institution had broken down,
and needed to be saved or reconstructed by pushing these women
back into the home.
2.1 Men, Women and Family in the City
The city no doubt encouraged a new spirit of individualism among
both men and women, and a freedom from the collective values
that were a feature of the smaller rural communities. But men and
women did not have equal access to this new urban space. As women
lost their industrial jobs and conservative people railed against their
presence in public spaces, women were forced to withdraw into
their homes. The public space became increasingly a male preserve,
and the domestic sphere was seen as the proper place for women.
Most political movements of the nineteenth century, such as Chartism
(a movement demanding the vote for all adult males) and the
10-hour movement (limiting hours of work in factories), mobilised
large numbers of men. Only gradually did women come to
participate in political movements for suffrage that demanded the
New words
Individualism – A theory which promotes the liberty, rights or
independent action of the individual, rather than of the
community
India and the Contemporary World
136
right to vote for women, or for married women’s rights to property
(from the 1870s).
By the twentieth century, the urban family had been transformed yet
again, partly by the experience of the valuable wartime work done
by women, who were employed in large numbers to meet war
demands. The family now consisted of much smaller units.
Above all, the family became the heart of a new market – of goods
and services, and of ideas. If the new industrial city provided
opportunities for mass work, it also raised the problem of mass
leisure on Sundays and other common holidays. How did people
organise their new-found leisure time?
2.2 Leisure and Consumption
For wealthy Britishers, there had long been an annual
‘London Season’. Several cultural events, such as the
opera, the theatre and classical music performances
were organised for an elite group of 300-400 families
in the late eighteenth century. Meanwhile, working
classes met in pubs to have a drink, exchange news
and sometimes also to organise for political action.
Many new types of large-scale entertainment for the
common people came into being, some made possible
with money from the state. Libraries, art galleries and
museums were established in the nineteenth century
to provide people with a sense of history and pride in
the achievements of the British. At first, visitors to the
British Museum in London numbered just about
15,000 every year, but when entry was made free
in 1810, visitors swamped the museum: their number
jumped to 127,643 in 1824-25, shooting up to 825,
901 by 1846. Music halls were popular among
the lower classes, and, by the early twentieth century,
cinema became the great mass entertainment for
mixed audiences.
British industrial workers were increasingly encouraged
to spend their holidays by the sea, so as to derive the
benefits of the sun and bracing winds. Over 1 million
British people went to the seaside at Blackpool in 1883;
by 1939 their numbers had gone up to 7 million.
Fig. 10 – A famous London resort, painting by T.E. Turner,
1923.
Pleasure gardens came in the nineteenth century to provide
facilities for sports, entertainment and refreshments for the
well-to-do.
137
Work, Life and Leisure
Fig. 11 – Sailor’s Home in East London, The Illustrated London News, 1873.
The working poor created spaces of entertainment wherever they lived.
Fig. 12 – A tavern with coaches
parked in front, early nineteenth
century.
The image makes clear the
connection taverns had with
horse-drawn coaches in the early
nineteenth century. Before the
railway age, taverns were places
where horse-drawn coaches
halted, and tired travellers had
food and drink and rested the
night. Taverns were located on
coach routes and had facilities for
overnight stays. After the coming
of the railway and bus transport,
taverns went into decline along
with horse-drawn coach
transport. Pubs came up near
railway stations and bus depots.
Here people could stop for a
quick drink and chat.
India and the Contemporary World
138
3 Politics in the City
In the severe winter of 1886, when outdoor work came to a
standstill, the London poor exploded in a riot, demanding relief
from the terrible conditions of poverty. Alarmed shopkeepers closed
down their establishments, fearing the 10,000-strong crowd that
was marching from Deptford to London. The marchers had to be
dispersed by the police. A similar riot occurred in late 1887; this
time, it was brutally suppressed by the police in what came to be
known as the Bloody Sunday of November 1887.
Two years later, thousands of London’s dockworkers went on strike
and marched through the city. According to one writer, ‘thousands
of the strikers had marched through the city without a pocket being
picked or a window being broken …’ The 12-day strike was called
to gain recognition for the dockworkers’ union.
From these examples you can see that large masses of people could
be drawn into political causes in the city. A large city population was
thus both a threat and an opportunity. State authorities went to
great lengths to reduce the possibility of rebellion and enhance urban
aesthetics, as the example of Paris shows.
Fig. 13 – A scene during the dockworkers’ strike, 1889.
139
Work, Life and Leisure
Fig. 15 – A cartoon representing Haussmann
as the ‘Attila of the Straight Line’, holding a
compass and a set square, and dominating the
plan of Paris.
Box 1
Haussmanisation of Paris
In 1852, Louis Napoleon III (a nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte) crowned himself emperor. After taking over, he undertook
the rebuilding of Paris with vigour. The chief architect of the new Paris was Baron Haussmann, the Prefect of the Seine.
His name has come to stand for the forcible reconstruction of cities to enhance their beauty and impose order. The poor
were evicted from the centre of Paris to reduce the possibility of political rebellion and to beautify the city.
For 17 years after 1852, Haussmann rebuilt Paris. Straight, broad avenues or boulevards and open spaces were designed,
and full-grown trees transplanted. By 1870, one-fifth of the streets of Paris were Haussmann’s creation. In addition,
policemen were employed, night patrols were begun, and bus shelters and tap water introduced.
Public works on this scale employed a large number of people: one in five working persons in Paris was in the building trade
in the 1860s. Yet this reconstruction displaced up to 350,000 people from the centre of Paris.
Even some of the wealthier inhabitants of Paris thought that the city had been monstrously transformed. The Goncourt
brothers, writing in the 1860s, for instance, lamented the passing of an earlier way of life, and the development of an
upper-class culture. Others believed that Haussmann had ‘killed the street’ and its life, to produce an empty, boring city,
full of similar-looking boulevards and facades. In a play called Maison Neuve written in 1866, an old shopkeeper said,
‘Nowadays for the slightest excursion there are miles to go! An eternal sidewalk going on and on forever! A tree, a bench,
a kiosk! A tree, a bench, a kiosk! A tree, a bench …’
The outcry against Haussmann’s Paris soon got converted into civic pride as the new capital became the toast of all
Europe. Paris became the hub of many new architectural, social and intellectual developments that were very influential
right through the twentieth century, even in other parts of the globe.
New streets
Other major streets
Fig. 14 – Plan of principal streets in Paris built by Baron
Haussmann between 1850 and 1870.
River Seine
India and the Contemporary World
140
In sharp contrast to Western Europe in the same period, Indian
cities did not mushroom in the nineteenth century. The pace of
urbanisation in India was slow under colonial rule. In the early
twentieth century, no more than 11 per cent of Indians were living
in cities. A large proportion of these urban dwellers were residents
of the three Presidency cities. These were multi-functional cities:
they had major ports, warehouses, homes and offices, army camps,
as well as educational institutions, museums and libraries. Bombay
was the premier city of India. It expanded rapidly from the late
nineteenth century, its population going up from 644,405 in 1872
to nearly 1,500,000 in 1941.
Let us look at how Bombay developed.
4 The City in Colonial India
Contradictory experiences of cities
Kali Prasanna Singh wrote a satire in Bengali
describing an evening scene in the Indian part
of Calcutta around 1862:
‘Gradually the darkness thickens. At this time,
thanks to English shoes, striped Santipur scarfs
[sic] and Simla dhuties, you can’t tell high from
low. Groups of fast young men, with peals of
laughter and plenty of English talk are knocking
at this door and that. They left home when
they saw the lamps lighted in the evening and
will return when the flour mills begin to work ...
Some cover their faces with scarfs [sic] and think
that no one recognises them. It is the evening
of … a Saturday and the city is unusually crowded.’
Hutam Pyancher Naksha, a collection of short
sketches on urban life in Calcutta, 1862.
Translated by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay.
In 1899, G.G. Agarkar wrote about Bombay:
‘The enormous expanse of Bombay city; its great
and palatial private and governmental mansions;
broad streets which accommodate up to six
carriages abreast … the struggle to enter the
merchants lanes; the frequent troublesome noise
of passenger and goods trains whistles and
wheels; the wearisome bargaining in every
market, by customers who wander from place
to place making enquiries with silver and notes
in their pockets to buy a variety of commodities;
the throngs of thousands of boats visible in the
harbour … the more or less rushed pace of official
and private employees going to work, checking
their watches … The clouds of black smoke
emitted by factory chimneys and the noise of
large machines in the innards of buildings … Men
and women with and without families belonging
to every caste and rank travelling in carriages or
horseback or on foot, to take the air and enjoy
a drive along the sea shore in the slanting rays of
the sun as it descends on the horizon … ’
G.G. Agarkar, ‘The Obverse Side of British Rule
or our Dire Poverty’.
Source
Source B
Read Source B carefully. What are the common features of city life
that the authors note? What are the contradictory experiences they
point to?
Discuss
Fig. 16 – A bustling street in Null Bazaar, Bombay, photograph
by Raja Deen Dayal, late nineteenth century.
New words
Presidency cities – The capitals of the Bombay, Bengal and
Madras Presidencies in British India
141
Work, Life and Leisure
Fig. 17 – A view of Bombay, 1852.
You can see the Colaba lighthouse on the right and St Thomas’s Church in the
distant background. It was still possible in the mid-nineteenth century for artists to
search for picturesque spots. The major development projects had not yet started.
4.1 Bombay: The Prime City of India?
In the seventeenth century, Bombay was a group of seven islands
under Portuguese control. In 1661, control of the islands passed
into British hands after the marriage of Britain’s King Charles II to
the Portuguese princess. The East India Company quickly shifted its
base from Surat, its principal western port, to Bombay.
At first, Bombay was the major outlet for cotton textiles from
Gujarat. Later, in the nineteenth century, the city functioned as a port
through which large quantities of raw materials such as cotton and
opium would pass. Gradually, it also became an important
administrative centre in western India, and then, by the end of the
nineteenth century, a major industrial centre.
4.2 Work in the City
Bombay became the capital of the Bombay Presidency in 1819,
after the Maratha defeat in the Anglo-Maratha war. The city quickly
expanded. With the growth of trade in cotton and opium, large
communities of traders and bankers as well as artisans and
shopkeepers came to settle in Bombay. The establishment of textile
mills led to a fresh surge in migration.
The first cotton textile mill in Bombay was established in 1854. By
1921, there were 85 cotton mills with about 146,000 workers. Only
Fig. 18 – A map of Bombay in the 1930s
showing the seven islands and the reclamations.
Old islands
Land
reclamation
India and the Contemporary World
142
about one-fourth of Bombay’s inhabitants between 1881 and 1931
were born in Bombay: the rest came from outside. Large numbers
flowed in from the nearby district of Ratnagiri to work in the
Bombay mills.
Women formed as much as 23 per cent of the mill workforce in
the period between 1919 and 1926. After that, their numbers dropped
steadily to less than 10 per cent of the total workforce. By the late
1930s, women’s jobs were increasingly taken over by machines or
by men.
Bombay dominated the maritime trade of India till well into the
twentieth century. It was also at the junction head of two major
railways. The railways encouraged an even higher scale of migration
into the city. For instance, famine in the dry regions of Kutch drove
large numbers of people into Bombay in 1888-89. The flood of
migrants in some years created panic and alarm in official circles.
Worried by the influx of population during the plague epidemic of
1898, district authorities sent about 30,000 people back to their places
of origin by 1901.
4.3 Housing and Neighbourhoods
Bombay was a crowded city. While every Londoner in the 1840s
enjoyed an average space of 155 square yards, Bombay had a mere
9.5 square yards. By 1872, when London had an average of 8 persons
per house, the density in Bombay was as high as 20. From its earliest
days, Bombay did not grow according to any plan, and houses,
especially in the Fort area, were interspersed with gardens.
The Bombay Fort area which formed the heart of the city in
the early 1800s was divided between a ‘native’ town, where
most of the Indians lived, and a European or ‘white’ section.
A European suburb and an industrial zone began to develop
to the north of the Fort settlement area, with a similar suburb
and cantonment in the south. This racial pattern was true of
all three Presidency cities.
With the rapid and unplanned expansion of the city, the
crisis of housing and water supply became acute by the
mid-1850s. The arrival of the textile mills only increased the
pressure on Bombay’s housing.
Like the European elite, the richer Parsi, Muslim and uppercaste traders and industrialists of Bombay lived in sprawling,
Have a debate in class with speakers for and
against the motion, on the following topic:
‘City development cannot take place without
destroying communities and lifestyles. This is a
necessary part of development.’
Activity
Fig. 19 – Interior of Esplanade House built for J.N. Tata
in 1887.
143
Work, Life and Leisure
spacious bungalows. In contrast, more than 70 per cent of the
working people lived in the thickly populated chawls of Bombay. Since
workers walked to their place of work, 90 per cent of millworkers
were housed in Girangaon, a ‘mill village’ not more than 15 minutes’
walk from the mills.
Chawls were multi-storeyed structures which had been built from at
least the 1860s in the ‘native’ parts of the town. Like the tenements
in London, these houses were largely owned by private landlords,
such as merchants, bankers, and building contractors, looking for
quick ways of earning money from anxious migrants. Each
chawl was divided into smaller one-room tenements which had no
private toilets.
Many families could reside at a time in a tenement. The Census of
1901 reported that ‘the mass of the island’s population or 80 per
cent of the total, resides in tenements of one room; the average
number of occupants lies between 4 and 5 …’ High rents forced
workers to share homes, either with relatives or caste fellows who
were streaming into the city. People had to keep the windows of
their rooms closed even in humid weather due to the ‘close proximity
of filthy gutters, privies, buffalo stables etc.’ Yet, though water was
scarce, and people often quarrelled every morning for a turn at the
tap, observers found that houses were kept quite clean.
The homes being small, streets and neighbourhoods were used for
a variety of activities such as cooking, washing and sleeping. Liquor
Why spaces cannot be cleared
Bombay’s first Municipal Commissioner, Arthur
Crawford, was appointed in 1865. He tried to
keep several ‘dangerous trades’ out of south
Bombay. He described how builders and
entrepreneurs bribed inspectors to continue with
their haphazard use of space, even when their
activities increased pollution:
‘… Kessowjee Naik brought his dyers back to
their old quarters. I prosecuted them, but was
defeated. Kessowjee Naik spent money like
water, eminent physicians swore solemnly that
dye pits were beneficial to health! … This
infamous success emboldened a powerful
German firm to open a large steam Dyeing
Factory close to Parbadevi Temple whose refuse
waters polluted the fair sands of Mahim Bay …
Last but not least Bhoys and Dasses, Shenvis
Brahmins and all the Jees, set up cotton and
spinning mills anywhere their sweet will prompted
them: for example close to the Byculla Club itself,
around the Race Course and Kamathippora
Foras Road, in Khetwady, on Girgaum Raod and
at Chowpatty.’
While reading such statements we must
remember that colonial officials liked to represent
Englishmen as honest and Indians as corrupt,
the Englishmen as concerned with pollution of
the environment and Indians as being uncaring
about such issues.
Source
Source C Fig. 20 – Scene by Robert Grindlay of Bombay, 1826.
A number of palanquins are being carried across the square.
Look at Fig. 20 What kinds of people do you
think used this mode of transport? Compare it
with the pictures of the horse-drawn tram
(Fig. 22) and the electric tram. Notice the
inversion of the numbers involved: the horsedrawn tram or electric tram needed only one
operator while a single traveller required
several people.
Activity
India and the Contemporary World
144
shops and akharas came up in any empty spot. Streets were also
used for different types of leisure activities. Parvathibai Bhor recalled
her childhood years in the early twentieth century this way: ‘There
was an open space in the middle of our four chawls. There the
magicians, monkey players or acrobats used to regularly perform
their acts. The Nandi bull used to come. I used to be especially
afraid of the Kadaklakshmi. To see that they had to beat themselves
on their naked bodies in order to fill their stomachs frightened me.’
Finally, chawls were also the place for the exchange of news about
jobs, strikes, riots or demonstrations.
Caste and family groups in the mill neighbourhoods were headed
by someone who was similar to a village headman. Sometimes,
the jobber in the mills could be the local neighbourhood
leader. He settled disputes, organised food supplies, or arranged
informal credit. He also brought important information on
political developments.
People who belonged to the ‘depressed classes’ found it even
more difficult to find housing. Lower castes were kept out of many
chawls and often had to live in shelters made of corrugated sheets,
leaves, or bamboo poles.
If town planning in London emerged from fears of social
revolution, planning in Bombay came about as a result of fears
about the plague epidemic. The City of Bombay Improvement
Trust was established in 1898; it focused on clearing poorer homes
out of the city centre. By 1918, Trust schemes had deprived 64,000
people of their homes, but only 14,000 were rehoused. In 1918, a
Rent Act was passed to keep rents reasonable, but it had the opposite
effect of producing a severe housing crisis, since landlords withdrew
houses from the market.
Expansion of the city has always posed a problem in Bombay
because of a scarcity of land. One of the ways the city of Bombay
has developed is through massive reclamation projects.
4.4 Land Reclamation in Bombay
Did you know that the seven islands of Bombay were joined into
one landmass only over a period of time? The earliest project began
in 1784. The Bombay governor William Hornby approved the
building of the great sea wall which prevented the flooding of the
low-lying areas of Bombay.
Fig. 21 – Chawl on Kalbadevi Road built in the
early twentieth century.
What do you notice about the organisation of
space in this building?
Imagine that you are a young person living in a
chawl. Describe one day in your life.
Activity
New words
Akharas – Traditional wrestling schools,
generally located in every neighbourhood,
where young people were trained to ensure
both physical and moral fitness
Depressed classes – A term often used to
denote those who were seen within the caste
order as ‘lower castes’ and ‘untouchables’
Reclamation – The reclaiming of marshy or
submerged areas or other wasteland for
settlements, cultivation or other use
145
Work, Life and Leisure
Since then, there have been several reclamation
projects. The need for additional commercial space
in the mid-nineteenth century led to the formulation
of several plans, both by government and private
companies, for the reclamation of more land from
the sea. Private companies became more interested
in taking financial risks. In 1864, the Back Bay
Reclamation Company won the right to reclaim
the western foreshore from the tip of Malabar
Hill to the end of Colaba. Reclamation often meant
the levelling of the hills around Bombay. By the
1870s, although most of the private companies
closed down due to the mounting cost, the city
had expanded to about 22 square miles. As the
population continued to increase rapidly in the early
twentieth century, every bit of the available area
was built over and new areas were reclaimed from the sea.
A successful reclamation project was undertaken by the Bombay
Port Trust, which built a dry dock between 1914 and 1918 and used
the excavated earth to create the 22-acre Ballard Estate. Subsequently,
the famous Marine Drive of Bombay was developed.
4.5 Bombay as the City of Dreams: The World of Cinema
and Culture
Who does not associate Bombay with its film industry? Despite its
massive overcrowding and difficult living conditions, Bombay
appears to many as a ‘mayapuri’ – a city of dreams.
Many Bombay films deal with the arrival in the city of new migrants,
and their encounters with the real pressures of daily life. Some popular
songs from the Bombay film industry speak of the contradictory
aspects of the city. In the film CID (1956) the hero’s buddy sings, ‘Ai
dil hai mushkil jeena yahan; zara hatke zara bachke, ye hai Bambai meri jaan’
(My heart, it is difficult to live here! move over a little, take care of
yourself! this is Bombay! my love). A slightly more disillusioned voice
sings in Guest House (1959): ‘Jiska juta usika sar, dil hai chhote bada
shahar, are vah re vah teri Bambai’ (Bombay, you city what a place! Here
one gets beaten with one’s own shoes! The city is big but people’s
hearts are small!).
When did the Bombay film industry make its first appearance?
Harishchandra Sakharam Bhatwadekar shot a scene of a wrestling
Fig. 22 – Colaba Causeway, late nineteenth century.
Notice that the trams are being drawn by horses.You can see
stables for horses on the left and the Tram Company’s offices in
the background.
Fig. 23 – Marine Drive.
A familiar landmark of Bombay, it was built on
land reclaimed from the sea in the twentieth
century.
India and the Contemporary World
146
Source
Source D
match in Bombay’s Hanging Gardens and it became India’s first
movie in 1896. Soon after, Dadasaheb Phalke made Raja Harishchandra
(1913). After that, there was no turning back. By 1925, Bombay
had become India’s film capital, producing films for a national
audience. The amount of money invested in about 50 Indian
films in 1947 was Rs 756 million. By 1987, the film industry employed
520,000 people.
Most of the people in the film industry were themselves migrants
who came from cities like Lahore, Calcutta, Madras and contributed
to the national character of the industry. Those who came from
Lahore, then in Punjab, were especially important for the
development of the Hindi film industry. Many famous writers, like
Ismat Chughtai and Saadat Hasan Manto, were associated with
Hindi cinema.
Bombay films have contributed in a big way to produce
an image of the city as a blend of dream and reality, of slums and
star bungalows.
The Many Sides of Bombay
My father came down the Sahyadris
A quilt over his shoulder
He stood at your doorstep
With nothing but his labour
…
I carried a tiffin box
To the mill since childhood
I was cast the way
A smith forges a hammer
I learned my ropes
Working on a loom
Learnt on occasion
To go on strike
My father withered away toiling
So will I, and will my little ones
Perhaps they too face such sad nights
Wrapped in coils of darkness
The verses of this poem are a stark
contrast to the glittering world of
films, pointing to the endless toil
which new migrants encounter in
the city.
Read Source D. What does the poem
communicate about the opportunities and
experience for each new generation?
Discuss
Excerpted from the poem Maze Vidyapeeth (1975) by Narayan Surve.
147
Work, Life and Leisure
Box 2
Not all cities in Asian countries developed in an unplanned manner.
There were many cities that were carefully planned and organised.
Consider the case of modern Singapore.
Lee Kuan Yew’s Singapore
Today, most of us know Singapore as a successful, rich, and wellplanned city, a model for city planning worldwide. Yet the city’s rise
to this status is quite recent. Until 1965, Singapore, though an
important port, shared all the problems of other Asian cities. Planning
was known in Singapore since 1822, but benefited only the small
community of white people who ruled Singapore. For the majority
of its inhabitants, there was overcrowding, lack of sanitation, poor
housing, and poverty.
All this changed after the city became an independent nation in
1965 under the leadership of Lee Kuan Yew, President of the
People’s Action Party. A massive housing and development
programme was undertaken and it completely altered the face of
the island nation. Through a programme of total planning which
left nothing to chance, every inch of the island’s territory was
controlled in its use. The government itself won popular support
by providing nearly 85 per cent of the population with ownership
housing of good quality. The tall housing blocks, which were well
ventilated and serviced, were examples of good physical planning.
But the buildings also redesigned social life: crime was reduced
through external corridors, the aged were housed alongside their
families, ’void decks’ or empty floors were provided in all buildings
for community activities.
Migration into the city was strictly controlled. Social relations between
the three major groups of people (the Chinese, the Malays and the
Indians) were also monitored to prevent racial conflict. Newspapers
and journals and all forms of communication and association were
also strictly controlled.
In 1986, in the National Day Rally speech, Lee Kuan Yew’s recalled
his early experiments with planning: ‘… we would not have made
economic progress, if we had not intervened on very personal
matters: who your neighbour is, how you live, the noise you make,
how you spit or what language you use. We decide what is right.
Never mind what the people think – that is another problem.’
Reported in The Straits Times.
Although the citizens of Singapore enjoy a very high degree of
material comfort and wealth, there are many who point out that
the city lacks a lively and challenging political culture.
Compare the examples of the work done by
Baron Haussmann in Paris and Lee Kuan Yew,
almost a hundred years later, in Singapore.
Discuss if physical comfort and beauty in the
city can be introduced only by controlling social
and private life. In your opinion, is this a good
enough reason for the government to make
rules about the way in which people should live
their personal lives?
Activity
Fig. 24 – Singapore Marina, which is built on
land reclaimed from the sea.
India and the Contemporary World
148
5 Cities and the Challenge of the Environment
City development everywhere occurred at the expense of ecology
and the environment. Natural features were flattened out or
transformed in response to the growing demand for space for
factories, housing and other institutions. Large quantities of refuse
and waste products polluted air and water, while excessive noise
became a feature of urban life.
The widespread use of coal in homes and industries in nineteenthcentury England raised serious problems. In industrial cities such as
Leeds, Bradford and Manchester, hundreds of factory chimneys
spewed black smoke into the skies. People joked that most inhabitants
of these cities grew up believing that the skies were grey and all
vegetation was black! Shopkeepers, homeowners and others
complained about the black fog that descended on their towns,
causing bad tempers, smoke-related illnesses, and dirty clothes.
When people first joined campaigns for cleaner air, the goal was to
control the nuisance through legislation. This was not at all easy,
since factory owners and steam engine owners did not want to spend
Fig. 25 – The London smog, The Illustrated London News, 1847.
Smoke from burning of coal, in industries and in homes, covered
London, making it difficult to breathe the air or see the road.
149
Work, Life and Leisure
on technologies that would improve their machines. By the 1840s, a
few towns such as Derby, Leeds and Manchester had laws to control
smoke in the city. But smoke was not easy to monitor or measure,
and owners got away with small adjustments to their machinery that
did nothing to stop the smoke. Moreover, the Smoke Abatement
Acts of 1847 and 1853, as they were called, did not always work to
clear the air.
Calcutta too had a long history of air pollution. Its inhabitants inhaled
grey smoke, particularly in the winter. Since the city was built on
marshy land, the resulting fog combined with smoke to generate
thick black smog. High levels of pollution were a consequence of
the huge population that depended on dung and wood as fuel in
their daily life. But the main polluters were the industries and
establishments that used steam engines run on coal.
Colonial authorities were at first intent on clearing the place of
miasmas, or harmful vapours, but the railway line introduced in
1855 brought a dangerous new pollutant into the picture – coal
from Raniganj. The high content of ash in Indian coal was a problem.
Many pleas were made to banish the dirty mills from the city, with
no effect. However, in 1863, Calcutta became the first Indian city to
get smoke nuisance legislation.
In 1920, the rice mills of Tollygunge began to burn rice husk
instead of coal, leading residents to complain that ‘the air is filled
up with black soot which falls like drizzling rain from morning till
night, and it has become impossible to live’. The inspectors of the
Bengal Smoke Nuisance Commission finally managed to control
industrial smoke. Controlling domestic smoke, however, was far
more difficult.
Conclusion
Despite its problems, the city has always been attractive to those
seeking freedom and opportunity. Even the gods in Durgacharan’s
novel, referred to at the beginning of this chapter, found heaven
imperfect, compared with all that they had witnessed and experienced
on their visit to Calcutta. Yet all the aspects of city life that upset
them were signs of the new routes to social and economic mobility
that the city offered to the millions who had made it their home.
Write out a notice from the Bengal Smoke
Nuisance Commission to the owner of a factory
pointing out the dangers and harmful effects of
industrial smoke.
Activity
India and the Contemporary World
150
Discuss
Project
1. What forms of entertainment came up in nineteenth century England to provide leisure
activities for the people.
2. Explain the social changes in London which led to the need for the Underground railway.
Why was the development of the Underground criticised?
3. Explain what is meant by the Haussmanisation of Paris. To what extent would you support or
oppose this form of development? Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper, to either support
or oppose this, giving reasons for your view.
4. To what extent does government regulation and new laws solve problems of pollution?
Discuss one example each of the success and failure of legislation to change the quality of
a) public life
b) private life
Make sure you watch any one of the Mumbai films discussed in this chapter. Compare and
contrast the portrayal of the city in one film discussed in this chapter, with a film set in Mumbai,
which you have recently seen.
Discuss
Write in brief
1. Give two reasons why the population of London expanded from the middle of the
eighteenth century.
2. What were the changes in the kind of work available to women in London between the
nineteenth and the twentieth century? Explain the factors which led to this change.
3. How does the existence of a large urban population affect each of the following?
Illustrate with historical examples.
 a) A private landlord
 b) A Police Superintendent in charge of law and order
c) A leader of a political party
4. Give explanations for the following:
a) Why well-off Londoners supported the need to build housing for the poor in the
nineteenth century.
b) Why a number of Bombay films were about the lives of migrants.
c) What led to the major expansion of Bombay’s population in the
mid-nineteenth century.
Write in brief
Project
