H
ave you observed the type of trees,
bushes, grasses and birds in the fields
and parks in and around your school?
Are they similar or there are variations? India
being a vast country you can imagine the
types of bio-forms available throughout the
country.
Our country India is one of the twelve
mega bio-diversity countries of the world.
With about 47,000 plant species India
occupies tenth place in the world and fourth
in Asia in plant diversity. There are about
15,000 flowering plants in India which
account for 6 per cent in the world’s total
number of flowering plants. The country has
many non-flowering plants such as ferns,
algae and fungi. India also has approximately
90,000 species of animals as well as a rich
variety of fish in its fresh and marine waters.
Natural vegetation refers to a plant
community which has grown naturally without
human aid and has been left undisturbed by
humans for a long time. This is termed as a
virgin vegetation. Thus, cultivated crops and
fruits, orchards form part of vegetation but not
natural vegetation.
The virgin vegetation, which
are purely Indian are known as endemic or
indigenous species but those which have come
from outside India are termed as exotic plants.
 The term flora is used to denote plants of
a particular region or period. Similarly, the
species of animals are referred to as fauna. This
huge diversity in flora and fauna kingdom is
due to the following factors.
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE
RELIEF
Land
Land affects the natural vegetation directly
and indirectly. Do you expect the same type
of vegetation in mountainous, plateau and
plain areas or in dry and wet regions? The
nature of land influences the type of
vegetation. The fertile level is generally devoted
to agriculture. The undulating and rough
terrains are areas where grassland and
woodlands develop and give shelter to a
variety of wild life.
Soil
The soils also vary over space. Different types
of soils provide basis for different types of
vegetation. The sandy soils of the desert
support cactus and thorny bushes while wet,
marshy, deltaic soils support mangroves and
deltaic vegetation. The hill slopes with some
depth of soil have conical trees.
CLIMATE
Temperature
The character and extent of vegetation are
mainly determined by temperature along with
humidity in the air, precipitation and soil. On
the slopes of the Himalayas and the hills of the
Peninsula above the height of 915 metres, the
fall in the temperature affects the types of
vegetation and its growth, and changes it from
tropical to subtropical temperate and alpine
vegetation.
5
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE 43
Photoperiod (Sunlight )
The variation in duration of sunlight at different
places is due to differences in latitude, altitude,
season and duration of the day. Due to longer
duration of sunlight, trees grow faster in
summer.
Why are the southern slopes in Himalayan
region covered with thick vegetation cover as compared
to northern slopes of the same hills?
Precipitation
In India almost the entire rainfall is brought in
by the advancing southwest monsoon (June to
September) and retreating northeast monsoons.
Areas of heavy rainfall have more dense vegetation
as compared to other areas of less rainfall.
Why have the western stopes of the
Western Ghats covered with thick forests and not
the eastern slopes?
Have you ever thought as to why forests
are important for human beings? Forests are
renewable resources and play a major role in
enhancing the quality of environment. They
modify local climate, control soil erosion,
regulate stream flow, support a variety of
industries, provide livelihood for many
communities and offer panoramic or scenic
view for recreation. It controls wind force and
temperature and causes rainfall. It provides
humus to the soil and shelter to the wild life.
India’s natural vegetation has undergone
many changes due to several factors such as
the growing demand for cultivated land,
development of industries and mining,
urbanisation and over-grazing of pastures.
Activity
Celebrate Van Mahotsav in your school/locality
and plant few spalings and notice their growth
The vegetation cover of India in large parts
is no more natural in the real sense. Except in
some inaccessible regions like the Himalayas,
the hilly region of central India and the
marusthali, the vegetation of most of the areas
has been modified at some places, or replaced
or degraded by human occupancy.
Activity
Study the bar graph (Figure 5.1) and
answer the following questions.
(i) Name the state having maximum area under
forest cover.
(ii) Name the union territory having minimum
area under forest cover and why?
According to India State of
Forest Report 2011, the forest cover in India is
21.05 per cent.
ECOSYSTEM
Plants occur in distinct groups of communities
in areas having similar climatic conditions. The
nature of the plants in an area, to a large extent,
determines the animal life in that area. When
the vegetation is altered, the animal life also
changes. All the plants and animals in an area
are interdependent and interrelated to each
other in their physical environment, thus,
Source : Environment Atlas of India, June 2001, Central Pollution Control Board Delhi
Table 5.1 : Temperature Characteristics of the Vegetation Zones
Vegetation Zones Mean annual Mean Temp. Remarks
Average Temp. in January
(in degree C) (in degrees C)
Tropical Above 24°C Above 18° No Frost
Sub-tropical 17°C to 24°C 10°C to 18°C Frost is rare
Temperate 7°C to 17°C -1°C to (-10 ) °C Frost some snow
Alpine Below 7°C Below–1°C Snow
2015-16
44 CONTEMPORARY INDIA
forming an ecosystem. Human beings are
also an integral part of the ecosystem. How
do the human beings influence the ecology
of a region? They utilise the vegetation and
wild life. The greed of human beings leads to
over utilisation of these resources. They cut
the trees and kill the animals creating
ecological imbalance. As a result some of the
plants and animals have reached the verge
of extinction.
Do you know that a very large ecosystem
on land having distinct types of vegetation and
animal life is called a biome. The biomes are
identified on the basis of plants.
TYPES OF VEGETATION
The following major types of vegetation may
be identified in our country (Figure 5.3).
(i) Tropical Evergreen Forests
(ii) Tropical Deciduous Forests
(iii) Tropical Thorn Forests and Scrubs
(iv) Montane Forests
(v) Mangrove Forests
Tropical Evergreen Forests
These forests are restricted to heavy rainfall
Figure 5.1 Area under Forest Cover
areas of the Western Ghats and the island
groups of Lakshadweep, Andaman and Nicobar,
upper parts of Assam and Tamil Nadu coast.
Source : India State of Forest Report 2013–14 AREA IN PERCENT
STATE/UT
Figure 5.2 : Tropical Evergreen Forest
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE 45
Study the given map for the forest cover and try to find the reasons as to why certain states have more area under
forest as compared to others?
Figure 5.3 : Natural Vegetation
2015-16
46 CONTEMPORARY INDIA
Figure 5.4 : Tropical Deciduous Forest
In these forests, the common animals found
are lion, tiger, pig, deer and elephant. A huge
variety of birds, lizards, snakes, and tortoises
are also found here.
The Thorn Forests and Scrubs
In regions with less than 70 cm of rainfall,
the natural vegetation consists of thorny trees
and bushes. This type of vegetation is found
in the north-western part of the country
including semi-arid areas of Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Uttar Pradesh and Haryana. Acacias, palms,
euphorbias and cacti are the main plant
species. Trees are scattered and have long roots
penetrating deep into the soil in order to get
moisture. The stems are succulent to conserve
water. Leaves are mostly thick and small to
minimize evaporation. These forests give way
to thorn forests and scrubs in arid areas.
Figure 5.5 : Thorn Forests and Scrubs
They are at their best in areas having more than
200 cm of rainfall with a short dry season. The
trees reach great heights up to 60 metres or even
above. Since the region is warm and wet
throughout the year, it has a luxuriant
vegetation of all kinds – trees, shrubs, and
creepers giving it a multilayered structure. There
is no definite time for trees to shed their leaves.
As such, these forests appear green all the year
round.
Some of the commercially important trees
of this forest are ebony, mahogany, rosewood,
rubber and cinchona.
The common animals found in these forests
are elephants, monkey, lemur and deer. The
one horned rhinoceros are found in the jungles
of Assam and West Bengal. Besides these
animals plenty of birds, bats, sloth, scorpions
and snails are also found in these jungles.
Tropical Deciduous Forests
These are the most widespread forests of India.
They are also called the monsoon forests and
spread over the region receiving rainfall
between 200 cm and 70 cm. Trees of this
forest-type shed their leaves for about six to
eight weeks in dry summer.
On the basis of the availability of water,
these forests are further divided into moist and
dry deciduous. The former is found in areas
receiving rainfall between 200 and 100 cm.
These forests exist, therefore, mostly in the
eastern part of the country – northeastern
states, along the foothills of the Himalayas,
Jharkhand, West Orissa and Chhattisgarh, and
on the eastern slopes of the Western Ghats.
Teak is the most dominant species of this forest.
Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair,
kusum, arjun, mulberry are other commercially
important species.
The dry deciduous forests are found in areas
having rainfall between 100 cm and 70 cm.
These forests are found in the rainier parts of
the peninsular plateau and the plains of Bihar
and Uttar Pradesh. There are open stretches
in which Teak, Sal, Peepal, Neem grow. A large
part of this region has been cleared for
cultivation and some parts are used for grazing.
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE 47
Figure 5.7 : Mangrove Forests
In these forests, the common animals are
rats, mice, rabbits, fox, wolf, tiger, lion, wild
ass, horses and camels.
Montane Forests
In mountainous areas, the decrease in
temperature with increasing altitude leads to
the corresponding change in natural
vegetation. As such, there is a succession of
natural vegetation belts in the same order as
we see from the tropical to the tundra region.
The wet temperate type of forests are found
between a height of 1000 and 2000 metres.
Evergreen broad-leaf trees such as oaks and
chestnuts predominate. Between 1500 and
3000 metres, temperate forests containing
coniferous trees like pine, deodar, silver fir,
spruce and cedar, are found. These forests
cover mostly the southern slopes of the
Himalayas, places having high altitude in
southern and north-east India. At higher
elevations, temperate grasslands are common.
At high altitudes, generally more than 3,600
metres above sea-level, temperate forests and
grasslands give way to the Alpine vegetation.
Silver fir, junipers, pines and birches are the
common trees of these forests. However, they
get progressively stunted as they approach
the snow-line. Ultimately through shrubs and
scrubs, they merge into the Alpine
grasslands. These are used extensively for
grazing by nomadic tribes like the Gujjars
and the Bakarwals. At higher altitudes,
mosses and lichens form part of tundra
vegetation.
The common animals found in these forests
are Kashmir stag, spotted dear, wild sheep, jack
rabbit, Tibetan antelope, yak, snow leopard,
squirrels, Shaggy horn wild ibex, bear and rare
red panda, sheep and goats with thick hair.
Mangrove Forests
The mangrove tidal forests are found in the
areas of coasts influenced by tides. Mud and
silt get accumutated on such coasts. Dense
mangroves are the common varieties with roots
of the plants submerged under water. The
deltas of the Ganga, the Mahanadi, the
Krishana, the Godavari and the Kaveri are
covered by such vegetation. In the GangaBrahamaputra delta, sundari trees are
found, which provide durable hard timber.
Palm, coconut, keora, agar, also grow in
some parts of the delta.
Royal Bengal Tiger is the famous animal
in these forests. Turtles, crocodiles, gharials
and snakes are also found in these forests.
Let us discuss : What will happen if plants and
animals disappear from the earth’s surface? can
the human beings survive under such a situation?
Why is bio-diversity necessary and why should it
be conserved? Figure 5.6 : Montane Forests
2015-16
48 CONTEMPORARY INDIA
MEDICINAL PLANTS
India is known for its herbs and spices from ancient times. Some 2,000 plants have been described in Ayurveda
and atleast 500 are in regular use. The World Conservation Union’s Red list has named 352 medicinal plants of
which 52 are critically threatened and 49 endangered. The commonly used plants in India are:
Sarpagandha : Used to treat blood pressure; it is found only in India.
Jamun : The juice from ripe fruit is used to prepare vinegar which is carminative and diuretic, and
has digestive properties. The powder of the seed is used for controlling diabetes.
Arjun : The fresh juice of leaves is a cure for earache. It is also used to regulate blood pressure.
Babool : Leaves are used as a cure for eye sores. Its gum is used as a tonic.
Neem : Has high antibiotic and antibacterial properties.
Tulsi Plant : Is used to cure cough and cold.
Kachnar : Is used to cure asthma and ulcers. The buds and roots are good for digestive problems.
Identify more medicinal plants in your area. Which plants are used as medicines by local
people to cure some diseases?
WILD LIFE
Like its flora, India is also rich in its fauna. It
has approximately 90,000 animal species.
The country has about 2,000 species of birds.
They constitute 13% of the world’s total. There
are 2,546 species of fish, which account for
nearly 12% of the world’s stock. It also shares
between 5 and 8 per cent of the world’s
amphibians, reptiles and mammals.
The elephants are the most majestic
animals among the mammals. They are found
in the hot wet forests of Assam, Karnataka and
Kerala. One-horned rhinoceroses are the other
animals, which live in swampy and marshy
lands of Assam and West Bengal. Arid areas
of the Rann of Kachchh and the Thar Desert
are the habitat for wild ass and camels
respectively. Indian bison, nilgai (blue bull),
chousingha (four horned antelope), gazel and
different species of deer are some
other animals found in India. It also
has several species of monkeys.
Wildlife Protection Act
was implemented in 1972 in India.
India is the only country in the
world that has both tigers and lions.
The natural habitat of the Indian lion
is the Gir forest in Gujarat. Tigers are
found in the forests of Madhya Pradesh,
the Sundarbans of West Bengal and the
Himalayan region. Leopards too are
members of the cat family. They are
important among animals of prey.
The Himalayas harbour a hardy range of
animals, which survive in extreme cold.
Ladakh’s freezing high altitudes are a home to
yak, the shaggy horned wild ox weighing
around one tonne, the Tibetan antelope, the
bharal (blue sheep), wild sheep, and the kiang
(Tibetan wild ass). Furhtermore, the ibex, bear,
snow-leopard and very rare red panda are
found in certain pockets.
In the rivers, lakes and coastal areas,
turtles, crocodiles and gharials are found. The
Source : Medicinal Plants by Dr. S.K. Jain, 5th edition 1994, National Book Trust of India
Activity
Can you identify the type of forest shown in this picture?
Identify some trees in it. What type of similarity/
dissimilarity you notice in this type of vegetation from
the one found in your region?
Do you know
The Gir Forest is the
last remaining habitat
of the Asiatic lion.
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE 49
Figure 5.8 : Wildlife Reserves
Dampara
2015-16
50 CONTEMPORARY INDIA
latter is the only representative of a variety of
crocodile, found in the world today.
Bird life in India is colourful. Peacocks,
pheasants, ducks, parakeets, cranes and
pigeons are some of the birds inhabiting the
forests and wetlands of the country.
We have selected our crops from a biodiverse environment i.e. from the reserve of
edible plants. We also experimented and
selected many medicinal plants. The animals
were selected from large stock provided by
nature as milch animal. They also provided
us draught power, transportation, meat,
eggs. The fish provide nutritive food. Many
insects help in pollination of crops and fruit
trees and exert biological control on such
insects, which are harmful. Every species has
a role to play in the ecosystem. Hence,
conservation is essential. As has been
mentioned earlier due to excessive
exploitation of the plants and animal
resources by human beings, the ecosystem
has been disturbed. About 1,300 plant
species are endangered and 20 species are
extinct. Quite a few animal species are also
endangered and some have become extinct.
The main causes for this major threat to
nature are hunting by greedy hunters for
commercial purposes. Pollution due to
chemical and industrial waste, acid deposits,
introduction of alien species and reckless
cutting of the forests to bring land under
cultivation and inhabitation, are also
responsible for the imbalance.
 To protect the flora and fauna of the
country, the government has taken many steps.
(i) Fourteen biosphere reserves have been set
up in the country to protect flora and fauna.
Four out of these, the Sunderbans in the
West Bengal, Nanda Devi in Uttarakhand,
the Gulf of Mannar in Tamil Nadu and the
Nilgiris (Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil
Nadu) have been included in the world
network of Biosphese reserves.
Activity
(i) Find out from the above newspaper cuttings, the main concern highlighted in the given news items.
(ii) Collect more information about various endangered species from newspapers and magazines.
(iii) Find out various steps taken by the Indian government to protect them.
(iv) Discribe how you can contribute to the protection of endangered animals and birds?
2015-16
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD LIFE 51
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below:
(i) To which one of the following types of vegetation does rubber belong to?
(a) Tundra (c) Himalayan
(b) Tidal (d) Tropical Evergreen
(ii) Cinchona trees are found in the areas of rainfall more than
(a) 100 cm (c) 70 cm
(b) 50 cm (d) less than 50 cm
(iii) In which of the following state is the Simlipal bio-reserve located?
(a) Punjab (b) Delhi
(c) Odisha (d) West Bengal
(iv) Which one of the following bio-reserves of India is not included in the world
network of bioreserve?
(a) Manas (c) Gulf of Mannar
(b) Nilgiri (d) Nanda devi
Fourteen Bio-reserves
• Sunderbans • Simlipal
• Gulf of Mannar • Dihang-Dibang
• The Nilgiris • Dibru Saikhowa
• Nanda Devi • Agasthyamalai
• Nokrek • Kanchenjunga
• Great Nicobar • Pachmari
• Manas • Achanakmar-Amarkantak
(ii) Financial and technical assistance is
provided to many Botanical Gardens by the
government since 1992.
Migratory Birds
Some of the wetlands of India are popular
with migratory birds. During winter,
birds, such as Siberian Crane come
in large numbers. One such place
favourable with birds is the Rann of
Kachchh. At a place where the desert
merges with the sea, flamingo with their
brilliant, pink plumage, come in
thousands to build nest mounds from the
salty mud and raise their young ones. It
is one among many extraordinary sights
in the country. Is it not a rich natural
heritage of ours?
(iii) Project Tiger, Project Rhino, Project Great
Indian Bustard and many other ecodevelopmental projects have been
introduced.
(iv) 89 National Parks, 490 Wildlife sanctuaries
and Zoological gardens are set up to take
care of Natural heritage.
All of us must realise the importance of
the natural ecosystem for our own survival.
It is possible if indiscriminate destruction of
natural environment is put to an immediate
end.
EXERCISE
2015-16
52 CONTEMPORARY INDIA
2. Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) Define an ecosystem.
(ii) What factors are responsible for the distribution of plants and animals in
India?
(iii) What is a bio-reserve? Give two examples.
(iv) Name two animals having habitat in tropical and montane type of vegetation.
3. Distinguish between
(i) Flora and Fauna
(ii) Tropical Evergreen and Deciduous forests
4. Name different types of Vegetation found in India and describe the vegetation of
high altitudes.
5. Quite a few species of plants and animals are endangered in India. Why?
6. Why has India a rich heritage of flora and fauna?
Map Skills
On an outline map of India, label the following.
(i) Areas of Evergreen Forests
(ii) Areas of Dry Deciduous Forests
(iii) Two national parks each in Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western parts
of the Country
Project/Activity
(i) Find some trees in your neighbourhood having medicinal values.
(ii) Find ten occupations getting raw material from forests and wild life.
(iii) Write a poem or paragraph showing the importance of wild life.
(iv) Write the script of a street play giving the importance of tree plantation and
try to enact it in your locality.
(v) Plant a tree either on your birthday or one of your family member’s birthday.
Note the growth of the tree and notice in which season it grows faster.
2015-16
