FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework, (NCF) 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle
marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to
shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and community.
The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to
implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and
the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope
these measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred
system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and
to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given
space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with
the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook
as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources
and sites of learning are ignored. Including creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers
of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority
and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in
small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for
this book, Professor M. H. Qureshi for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful
to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions
and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their
resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members
2021–22
of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department
of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and
Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an
organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in
the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which
will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Research and Training

TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCE AT THE
SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
M. H. Qureshi, Professor, CSRD, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
MEMBERS
K. Jaya, PGT, Convent of Jesus and Mary, Bangla Sahib Road, New Delhi
Punam Behari, Reader, Miranda House, Chhatra Marg, University of Delhi, Delhi
Saroj Sharma, TGT (Retd.), Mother’s International School, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi
Sudeshna Bhattacharya, Reader, Miranda House, Chhatra Marg, University
of Delhi, Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Tannu Malik, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the
contributions of B.S. Butola, Professor, CSRD, JNU; Jebachh Singh, PGT Geography,
Sir G. D. Patliputra Inter School, Patna, and Krishna Kumar Upadhyaya, PGT Geography,
K.V.A.F.S., Bareily, in the development of this textbook.
Acknowledgements are also due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Social Science and Humanities, NCERT, for her valuable support at
every stage of preparation of this textbook.
The Council is also grateful to the individuals and organisations as listed below for
providing various photographs and illustrations used in this textbook:
M.H. Qureshi, Professor, CSRD, JNU, for Figure 2.5; ITDC/Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India for Figures 2.4, 2.6, 2.7, 3.5, 4.1 and pictures of river, migratory
birds and a picture of montane forests on pages 23, 48 and 51 respectively, picture of
desert on Cover I, picture of clouds on Cover IV; cross-section interactive for a picture
of lions on page 48; Tourism of Andaman and Nicobar, Government of India for
Figure 2.9; Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India for Figures
2.3, 3.6, picture of corals on page 15 and picture of forest on Cover I; Photo Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India for Figure 2.8; Business
Line for Figure 3.2; and Hindustan Times, New Delhi, for news in two collages given on
pages 38 and 50.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Anil Sharma and
Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators; Sameer Khatana and Amar Kumar Prusty, Copy Editors;
Shreshtha and Deepti Sharma, Proof Readers; and Dinesh Kumar, In-charge,
Computer Station, who have helped in giving a final shape to this textbook. The efforts
of the Publication Division, NCERT, are also duly acknowledged.
The following are applicable to all the maps of India used in this book
© Government of India, Copyright 2006
1. The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher.
2. The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from
the appropriate base line.
3. The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh.
4. The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are
as interpreted from the ‘North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act,1971,’ but have yet to be verified.
5. The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by
Survey of India.
6. The state boundaries between Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand, and Chhattisgarh
and Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned.
7. The spellings of names in this map have been taken from various sources.


